The First Definitive Study of Enochian Chess

Enochian chess' fascinating history begins in the late 1800s,
when occultists Wynn Westcott and MacGregor Mathers updat-
ed the Enochian system of magic for the Hermetic Order of the
Golden Dawn, and incorporated a four-handed chess game orig-
inally dubbed Rosicrucian chess-later dubbed Enochian chess,
due to its derivation from the Enochian Tablets of Dr. John Dee.

Since the publication of the secret rituals of the Golden Dawn in
the 1930s by the late Israel Regardie, there has been much
speculation about Enochian chess' system of play, since the pub-
lished manuscripts lacked the information necessary to actual-
ly play the game. But now, Chris Zalewski has made Enochian
chess accessible as a "working game,," with all the examples,
rules and directions you will need to enjoy playing it.

Whether you want to explore Enochian chess as a divinatory
tool rich with magical associations and kabbalistic analogies
or are just intrigued by a four-handed variant of a "normal"
chess game, you will find this book thorough, to-the-point and
the most complete and authoritative text on the subject ever
published.


About the Author
Chris Zalewski was born in 1956 in Hastings, New Zealand. She is a
keen amateur artist and bodybuilder, has a diploma in herbal medi-
cine, runs an herbal clinic and is president of the Wellington Astro-
logical Society. In early 1980, she was initiated into the Golden Dawn,
with her husband Pat, by ex-members of the New Zealand temple,
Whare Ra. Her study of the Enochian chess game for the last 14 years
was acknowledged by the late Israel Regardie as taking the game to
an area that was quite beyond him. Her other interests include alche-
my and other forms of esoteric healing. She resides with her husband
in Wellington, where she has a long-standing tradition with the Gold-
en Dawn through their Thoth-Hermes Temple.

To Write to the Author
If you wish to contact the author or would like more information about
this book, please write to the author in care of Llewellyn Worldwide
and we will forward your request. Both the author and publisher
appreciate hearing from you and learning of your enjoyment of this
book and how it has helped you. Llewellyn Worldwide cannot guaran-
tee that every letter written to the author can be answered, but all
will be forwarded. For more information about the Golden Dawn or to
ask a question write to:
Ra-Horakhty Temple, Hermetic Society of the Golden Dawn
31849 Pacific Highway South, Suite 107
Federal Way, Washington 98003
To write to the author, address:
Chris Zalewski
C/O Llewellyn Worldwide
P.O. Box 64383-895, St. Paul, MN 55164-0383, U.S.A.
Please enclose international postal reply coupon.
Free Catalog from Llewellyn
For more than 90 years Llewellyn has brought its readers knowledge
in the fields of metaphysics and human potential. Learn about the
newest books in spiritual guidance, natural healing, astrology, occult
philosophy and more. Enjoy book reviews, new age articles, a calendar
of events, plus current advertised products and services. To get your
free copy of the Llewellyn's New Worlds of Mind and Spirit, send your
name and address to:
Llewellyn's New Worlds of Mind and Spirit
P.O. Box 64383-895, St. Paul, MN 55164-0383, U.S.A.


```
Llewellyn's Golden Dawn Series
```
Enochian Chess

of the

Golden Dawn

A Four-Handed Chess Game

Chris Zalewski

```
1994
Llewellyn Publications
St. Paul, Minnesota 55164-0383, U.S.A.
```

Enochian Chess ofthe Golden Dawn. Copyright O 1994 by Chris
Zalewski. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of
America. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any
manner whatsoever without written permission from Llewellyn
Publications except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
critical articles and reviews.

```
FIRST EDITION
First Printing, 1994
```
```
Cover painting by Richard Dudschus
Illustrations by David Stoelk and Richard Dudschus
```
```
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Zalewski, Chris
Enochian chess of the Golden Dawn : a four-handed chess game /
Chris Zalewski
p. cm.--(Llewellyn's Golden Dawn series)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-87542-895-9 : $12.95 ($17.50 Can.)
```
1. Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn-Rituals. 2. Enochian magic.
3. Chess-Miscellanea. I. Title. 11. Series.
BF1623.R7Z33 1994
135l.4--dc20 9347223
CIP

```
Llewellyn Publications
A Division of Llewellyn Worldwide, Ltd.
P.O. Box 64383, St. Paul, MN 55164-
```

About Llewellyn's Golden Dawn Series

Just as, 100 years ago, the original Order of the Golden Dawn initiat-
ed a powerful rebirth of interest in the Western Esoteric Tradition
that has lasted through this day, so do we expect this series of books
to add new impetus to the Great Work itself among an ever broaden-
ing base of sincere students.

```
I further promise and swear that with the Divine Permission, I
will from this day forward, apply myself to the Great Work-
which is: to purify and exalt my Spiritual Nature so that with
the Divine Aid I may at length attain to be more than human,
and thus gradually raise and unite myself to my Higher and
Divine Genius, and that in this event I will not abuse the great
power entrusted to me.
```
With this oath, the Adeptus Minor of the Inner Order committed hid
herself to undertake, consciously and deliberately, that which was
ordained as the birthright of all Humanity: TO BECOME MORE
THAN HUMAN!

It is this that is the ultimate message of Esotericism: that evolution
continues, and that the purpose of each life is to grow into the Image
set for us by our Creator, to attain and reveal our own Divinity.

These books will themselves make more easily accessible the Spiritu-
al Technology that is inherent in the Golden Dawn System. It is a sys-
tem that allows for individual as well as group endeavor; a system
that works within or without an organized lodge; a system that is
based on universal principles that will be shown to be global in their
impact today.

And it is practical. The works in this series will be practical in their
application. You need neither travel to the mountaintop nor obtain
any tool other than your own consciousness. No garment need you
other than that of your own imagination. No authority need you other
than that of your own True Will.

Set forth then into the New Dawn-a New Start on the greatest
adventure there is: to become One with the Divine Genius.


```
Other Books by Chris Zalewski:
```
Herbs in Magic & Alchemy
(Prism Press, 1990)

```
With Pat Zalewski:
```
```
2-5: Secret Teachings of the Golden Dawn
Book II: The Zelator Ritual 1=
(Llewellyn Publications, 1992)
```
```
Equinox and Solstice Rituals of the Golden Dawn
(Llewellyn Publications, 1992)
```
```
Other Books in Llewellyn's Golden Dawn Series:
```
```
By Pat Zalewski:
Golden Dawn Enochian Magic
2-5: Secret Teachings of the Golden Dawn
Book I: The Neophyte Ritual 0=
Kabbalah of the Golden Dawn
```
```
By Israel Regardie:
The Golden Dawn
```
```
By Chic Cicero and Sandra Tabatha Cicero:
Secrets of a Golden Dawn Temple
```

Acknowledgments

A thank you to Karl for the many games played while
I was researching the game; to Kevin for his games
and objective opinions; to Pat for his help and encour-
agement in writing this book; and to those who wish
to remain nameless.



Dedicated to Percy Wilkinson



Table of Contents

Foreword, by Adam McLean
Preface, by P. J. Zalewski
To the Reader: How to Use this Book

```
Part I-Book of Earth
Introduction
Constructing Your Enachian Chess Set
The Enochian System of Magic and
Its Relationship to Enochian Chess
Chaturanga
Constructing Your Chessboards
Alternative Method of Constructing Your Chess Set
Constructing the Chess Pieces
The Pawns and Their Elemental Associations
Coloring and Descriptions of the Chess Pieces
Appendix to Part I: Table of Symbols and Associations
```
```
Part 11-Book of Air
The Game, Its Rules and Method of Play
Enochian Chess: The Game
Oficial Rules for Enochian Chess
Setting Up Your Boards: Game Play Settings
Positioning of the Chess Pieces
Which Board to Use?
```
```
xix
xxiii
xxix
```

```
Recording Game Play
Game Strategy
Openings
Earth and Fire Board Play Settings
Earth of Earth and Earth of Fire Setting
Air of Earth and Air of Fire Setting
Water of Earth and Water of Fire Setting
Fire of Earth and Fire of Fire Setting
Air and Water Board Play Settings
Earth of Air and Earth of Water Setting
Air of Air and Air of Water Setting
Water of Air and Water of Water Setting
Fire of Air and Fire of Water Setting
Middle-Game and Endgame
```
Part 111-Book of Water
Divination
Enochian Chess Divination: Introduction
Enochian Chess Divination: Official Rules
Setting Up Your Board for a Divination Game
The Elemental Boards
Fire Board
Water Board
Air Board
Earth Board
The Squares
Piece Positions
Ptah
Divinatory Meanings of the Chess Pieces
The Kings
The Knights
The Queens


```
The Bishops
The Rooks
Analyzing a Divination Game
Piece Movement and How the Pieces Relate
to the Question
Planets in the Elements
The Squares and Their Influences
Divining the Timing of Events
Direct, Indirect Action
Significator
Chess Piece Relationships and Movements
Divination Example
```
Part IV-Book of Fire
Training of the Adept
And in the Beginning
Four Ego Types
Ritual Magic and the Chess Game
Index for General Reference to the
Enterer Ceremony of the 0=0 Grade
22 Formula of Chess Divination Under
the Letter Vau
Experimental Methodology
22 Formula of Transformation Under
the Letter Shin
22 Formula of Evocation Under the Letter Yod
Interesting Visitors

```
Ptah-Kether
```
```
Appendix: Enochian Chess Pieces
```
```
Bibliography
```


Figures

Figure Page
The Four Angelic Watchtowers
Fire Tablet
Water Tablet
Air Tablet
Earth Tablet
Symbology of the Earth Board
Symbology of the Air Board
Symbology of the Water Board
Symbology of the Fire Board
Order of Tetragrammaton Applied to the
Enochian Chessboards
Pyramid Faces of a Chess Square
Four Pawns
Osiris
Horus
Isis
Aroueris
Nephthys
Socharis
Seb
Knousou Pekht
Shu Zoan
Tharpeshest Jefine Pasht
Ptah ha Pan-Lses
Sebek
Thoueris
Hapimoun
Shooen


Figure
2 7
28
29
30
3 1
32
33
34
35

```
Chnupis Kneph
Ra
Sati-Ashtoreth
Toum
Anouke
Ptah
Swastika Placings of the Air of Fire Setting
Piece Positioning for Opening Play Settings
Enochian Chess Game Recording Codes
Applied to a Chessboard
Format for a Game Recording Sheet
Format for a Divination Game Recording Sheet
Queen's Defense
Queen's Fork
Piece Positions at Move 9 in Example 1
Earth King Fork in Earth Angle
Move 18 in Example 2, Earth to Move
Final Position in Example 2(a)
Move 25, Example 2(b), Earth to Move
Final Positions in Example 2(b)
Move 9, Example 3, Water to Move
Example 4, Positions at Move 29
Example 4, Final Positions
House and Zodiac Attributions to the Fire
and Earth Enochian Chessboards
House and Zodiac Attributions to the Water
and Air Enochian Chessboards
Influencing Forces from Calvary Cross
Division of Faces on the Tree of Life
The Triad Types and Chess Pieces and Pawns
Applied to the Tree of Life
Jacob's Ladder: The Four Worlds in the
World of Assiah- Enochian Chess Set
Pieces Applied
```
```
Page
69
7 1
73
75
7 7
79
102
103
```

Table
I
I
I
IV

VII
VIII
IX
X
XI

```
Astrological Attribution to Tetragrammaton
God-form Names and Their Piece Attributions
Four Pawns and Their Associations
Royal Arcana and Elemental Associations of
the Enochian Chess Pieces
Table of Planetary Associations to the
Enochian Chess Pieces
Elemental Strengths and Weaknesses of
the Chess Pieces in the Chessboards
and Angles
Planetary Strengths and Affinities
Operation of Planets in Houses
Zodiacal Influences
Geomantic Figures and Associations
Geomantic Influences in the Elemental Angles
of the Enochian Chessboards
```
```
Page
29
35
36
```


Foreword

##### M

any years ago when I first encountered the Golden Dawn
through Israel Regardie's four volumes, I remember becom-
ing especially drawn to the Enochian chess described there.
Like many others studying this material, I tried to construct
a chess set and set of boards, but there did not seem to be enough
information in Regardie's gathering of material for me to be able to
follow this through. However, the system still interested me and I
kept hoping that someone would eventually publish a more com-
plete description of the game.
In 1987 while visiting R.A. Gilbert to discuss a few publish-
ing ideas, he was kind enough to show me a box belonging to
W. Wynn Westcott, one of the co-founders of the Hermetic Order
of the Golden Dawn. In this box was a complete set of Enochian
chessmen consisting of beautifully colored thick cards cut into
the shapes of the chessmen. It was truly exciting to be able to
handle these, and I became keenly aware that what I held in
my hands that afternoon was the originally designed set of
chessmen as worked out by Westcott, the archetype from which
the later sets had been copied. In that moment as we gazed at


xx Enochian Chess of the Golden Dawn

these chessmen, Gilbert and I decided that we must find some
way of publishing this set of cards.
At that time I had been able to structure my work through
the Hermetic Research Trust and had some funds to undertake
publications. However, these could not cover the expense of full-
color printing, and we decided to produce a very small edition
using color photocopying. In fact only 50 copies were produced.
Together with these facsimiles I published a small book into
which I gathered all the material I could find on this Enochian
or Rosicrucian chess. Despite a great deal of searching for
sources, I felt unhappy at not having found a coherent set of
rules for play. What rules could be found in the Order papers
were fragmentary and obscure and could not possibly provide a
practical basis for a playing strategy. So I felt my little book
rather incomplete. I felt much as I had done when first discov-
ering Enochian chess in Regardie's book, having in my hands
part of a beautiful esoteric system but lacking the key with
which to activate it and bring it to life.
While I was compiling material for my book, Pat Zalewski
had been kind enough to send me color photographs of the
Enochian chess set used in the Whare Ra Lodge (which was
derived from the Golden Dawn impulse that Dr. R.W. Felkin, one
of the important later figures in G.D. history, had brought to New
Zealand when he moved there in 1917-18). These Enochian
chessmen were almost an exact copy of the Westcott originals.
Pat Zalewski also informed me that Chris Zalewski was
writing a book on the Enochian chess game and had worked out
a coherent set of rules for play. It was not possible to include
any of Chris's material in my publication, but I eagerly awaited
the publication of her book. I was surprised and pleased to be
asked to write this short foreword to her book, and a copy of the
manuscript arrived shortly after. In this I was delighted to find
a complete working set of rules which Chris has constructed by
many years of actual experimental playing with different vari-
ations of the game.
The rules she presents here provide a basis for playing a
coherent game of Enochian chess, and one can see definite


```
Foreword xxi
```
strategies and goals for the play of the game. However, I was
also pleased to find that Chris had worked extensively upon the
parallel divinatory aspect of Enochian chess and provided a sys-
tem for using the game as a divinatory tool. This book also
incorporates practical advice on constructing a chess set and
documents much of the theoretical material on the occult sys-
tem underlying the game. This book is perhaps most valuable in
that it provides the reader for the first time with a working set
of rules for Enochian chess, and I feel sure many occultists will
be delighted to use her insights and ideas in their own work
with this elaborate esoteric system.



Preface

##### T

```
he first introduction both Chris and I had to Enochian
chess was through the published Golden Dawn papers of
Israel Regardie. At the time, we thought that this material
was hardly more than adequate; there were quite a number
of gaps. Chris worked for a number of years on the Enochian
chess game trying to reconstruct the rules. Being extremely
keen on standard chess play, she found herself continually over
the years coming back to try to do more research into the
Enochian game. After we were initiated into the Golden Dawn
(under its New Zealand name "Emerald of the Seas"), we both
found ourselves in contact with members of the now defunct
Whare Ra Temple, which was the last of the temples to survive
after the great Golden Dawn schism in 1900.
As it turned out, very few people in the Whare Ra Temple
knew how to play Enochian chess or had even made their chess
sets. We were eventually helped in this area by an elderly frater
by the name of Percy Wilkinson, who was one of the few to have
made his Enochian chess set and learned to play. Wynn West-
cott's notebook on Enochian chess happened to be at Whare Ra,
and we had the opportunity to study a copy of it. We found out
that, like Regardie7s published papers on the subject, it was
```

xxiv Enochian Chess of the Golden Dawn

very incomplete. As far as I can make out, Enochian chess was
not introduced into the Golden Dawn for study until the Practi-
cus Adeptus Minor level, or third level of the 5=6 grade, where
the first part of the Y papers was given out. If the reader will
refer to my Secret Inner Order Rituals of the Golden Dawn (Fal-
con Press, 1988, p. 174), where the grade requirements for the
Practicus Adeptus Minor grade are given, it says:

14. The thorough elementary knowledge of the Formulas of
the Awakening of the Abodes, by means of the Play or Raying
of the Checkers of the Lesser Angles of the Enochian Tablets.

Although we are told by occult historian Ellic Howe that
this grade was never implemented, a number of its papers,
including the above chess papers, obviously were given out in
some temples of the Stella Matutina at 6=5 level. In our copy of
Wynn Westcott's chess notebook, Ritual Y, Second Part, was
"Issued to such Z.A.M's as are in the fourth Stage (the Philoso-
phus Adeptus Minor Grade) by Order of the Chief Adept G.H.
Frater D.D.C.F." If this was the case, then very few in the Gold-
en Dawn, with the exception of MacGregor Mathers or his wife
(who were 6=5) and Westcott, would have known about Enochi-
an chess unless they dabbled in it unofficially.
In his Complete Golden Dawn System of Magic, however,
Regardie published certain papers belonging to Leigh F. Gard-
ner. The natural assumption by the reader is that the papers he
published were all Gardner's. If that is the case, the Enochian
chess material must have been given out at the second level of
the 5=6 grade (Theoricus Adeptus Minor), which Gardner held.
He would not have been given the papers for a higher level.
Yeats made the comment that he played Enochian chess
with Mathers, his wife and a spirit, in Paris, though he was
only at the first level of the 5=6 grade. There appear to be some
exceptions to Westcott's rule, therefore. Exactly how widespread
it was is anyone's guess. One would have to have a list of man-
uscripts circulated to the various temples to find out. There is
also a possibility that the papers were circulated at the first


```
Preface xxv
```
stage of the 5=6 level but individuals were not examined in it
until much later. It appears that when Mathers was expelled
from the Golden Dawn, a number of papers held for the Practi-
cus Adeptus Minor Grade fell into the hands of those who had
never been fully instructed in it. This of course applies to a
number of papers, such as "The Ring and the Disc" etc., but it
appears that, while some of Mathers' papers were seized, others
were not.
Enochian chess does not appear to have been a secret, but
its component parts were, I think. In the Golden Dawn Com-
panion, R.A. Gilbert lists the Enochian chess material as part of
the Second Order papers but does not state which grade the Y
papers were for. In the same book, the Y papers are listed under
the Stella Matutina as part of the Theoricus Adeptus Minor
Grade, but the comment is made that this is part of the 6=5
work. As far as I am aware, the second level of the 5=6 grade
only existed briefly, if at all, in the Stella Matutina, and cer-
tainly not in the New Zealand Whare Ra Temple. Regardie's
publication places the chess papers at the first level of the 5=6
grade, through insinuation, and others have assumed the same
ever since. Clearly Westcott intended to add more to the Enochi-
an chess papers for higher grades of the Golden Dawn, but
unfortunately did not have the opportunity to do so before he
demitted from the Order in the mid-1890s.
We were often told by former Whare Ra members who did
make their chess sets that game play was almost impossible
because of the lack of rules. Since there was no doubt that West-
cott based the Enochian chess game on the Indian game, Chat-
uranga, Chris went back to the original sources, as contained in
the Tithitattava and in the works of Duncan Forbes, Edward
Falkener and H.J.R. Murray, plus some original sources quoted
by the latter. Translations and sources were provided by various
members of the Indian Society here in Wellington.
By 1980 the first set of coherent rules was worked out after
many hours of game play, with Enochian chess games being
played a number of times each week until the early hours of the
morning by Chris and her chess associates. Frankly, by that


xxvi Enochian Chess of the Golden Dawn

stage, I felt I was seeing Enochian chess in my sleep. It
appeared at one time that whatever room of the house I was in,
I was always tripping over an Enochian chess game. Chris
eventually won out, and I adopted the philosophy "if you can't
lick 'em, then join 'em." When the rules had been reworked a
number of times, they were passed around to selected friends to
play by mail. We feel sure that at least one set was sent across
the Pacific to members of one occult organization that prefers to
remain nameless.
In 1981 both Chris and I put some of our findings in a small
volume titled Enochian Chess. But even with the later efforts of
Regardie, we found no takers. In hindsight, that work was very
inferior to the book you now hold. Gradually, over a period of
time, Chris rewrote the original manuscript. She retained very
little; in essence, it became a completely new book. Since my
input was almost nonexistent, we both felt that this work would
be better published under her name alone rather than the two
of us as in the original manuscript.
In 1983 when Israel Regardie first came to New Zealand, he
was astounded at the development to which Chris had taken
the game of Enochian chess, as he mentioned in his introduc-
tion to our unpublished book on the Golden Dawn Tarot. Chris
was originally uncertain as to whether to publish the Enochian
chess book in two volumes, the first on game strategy and the
second on divination. However, she decided that it would not be
a publishable book in that form and opted for a basic introduc-
tion to the two areas.
When Chris first put this book together, it was outlined in
such a manner that those interested in a four-handed chess
game, but with no occult leanings, would find the book as inter-
esting as would an occultist. The book is organized so that the
chess enthusiast can skip the chapters on occultism and simply
reap the benefits of Chris's vast experience of the game in all
its variations.
In 1988 Adam McLean from the prestigious Hermetic Jour-
nal asked me to write a small section on the Enochian chess
game for his forthcoming publication on the subject. McLean


```
Preface xxvii
```
had, through the efforts of Bob Gilbert, found Westcott's chess
pieces and was also selling chess sets. I immediately sent over
photos of the Whare Ra chess pieces. For the most part, accord-
ing to McLean, they were identical with Westcott's except for
being more detailed. McLean astutely made the comment in his
book that he felt the lack of chess rules did not mean that the
Adept had to do for himself, but that the rules were simply
unfinished. Since a number of authors to date have tried to look
for some special esoteric significance for this fact, I can concur
with McLean that he was quite correct in his assumption. If
there were rules for this game, they would have been in West-
cott's chess notebook. They were not, nor did anyone out here
know of them. Also, according to a member of Whare Ra who
was friendly with a high Alpha et Omega member in England,
they did not exist in the A.O. temples under Mathers, either.
It has often been said that the oriental game of mah-jong is a
game for mystics. For Enochian chess, I say doubly so. Having
been both a player and a watcher of this game over the years, I do
not doubt that what is in this volume is all there is on the subject.
I am continually struck by the inner transformation that the
game brings about after exposure to a particular Enochian
chessboard. When we made our first Enochian chess set, the
pieces were sculpted from clay and we opted for an entire pan-
theon per board. The remarkable thing about the process of
making the pieces was that they were done through a process of
automatic sculpting. This is much akin to the automatic writing
method where the person becomes a vehicle for some force or
another. The pieces were literally made this way; my hands
hardly made any conscious effort.
I have tried many times over the last decade to duplicate this
process but have failed. It only occurred when the original pieces
were being made. Chris also underwent a similar experience
when painting the pieces and boards. The actual painting of the
chessboards and the making of the pieces in fact becomes a very
mystical experience during which a number of inner transfor-
mations occur. I do say this lightly, and for this reason I would
urge you to try to make your own set rather than buying one.


xxviii Enochian Chess of the Golden Dawn

Chris is continually working and updating the game based
on her experiences. No doubt over the years future publications
will also follow suit. Like ordinary chess, this game needs expo-
sure and many different viewpoints for it to be explored and
most of all for it to be accepted by the general public. Westcott
actually told R.W. Felkin that the game could be played by
those outside the Order provided they did not give away the
esoteric associations. Since Regardie's publication, however,
this hardly matters. Almost anyone can play if they wish,
though I would be extremely hesitant about playing with people
on an Enochian chessboard if they had never been exposed to
the Tablets before, as the colors can have quite an effect.
Enochian chess only becomes Enochian chess when one uses a
fully colored Enochian chessboard. That makes the distinction
between it and other games of four- or two-handed chess.
There are three basic levels in Enochian chess. The first is
game strategy, the second is divination and the third relates to
a personal transformation due to working with the other two. It
is my personal conviction that when one plays a game of
Enochian chess as a straight chess game, then one should forget
about all the conscious paraphernalia and simply let the sub-
liminal messages being sent to the psyche take over. Too much
emphasis, I feel, is placed on being aware of hidden meanings in
the game, such as attacking along certain lines that have astro-
logical significance. While this may relate to divination, it cer-
tainly does not have relevance in straight game play. Quite a
number of students, when they first play Enochian chess, look
immediately for some mystic meaning in the game. As a result,
they completely miss the whole point of the exercise. They get
so bogged down in trivia that they are lost in the part and for-
get the whole. In my opinion, this was a very real problem in
Golden Dawn work and the downfall of a number of temples.

Wellington, N.Z.
1990


To the Reader:

How to Use

This Book

##### T

his book has been divided into four parts. Parts I and I1 are
for those of you who are only interested in Enochian chess
as a "game" rather than in the esoteric and divinatory use
of the chess set.
Part I is the Book of Earth and introduces Enochian chess to
the reader. It shows the reader how to go about constructing the
chessboards and sets of chess pieces. It also provides a way of
constructing a four-handed chess set without all the colors and
symbology for the non-occultist.
Part I1 is the Book of Air and gives the rules and strategical
use of Enochian chess. It explains the method of play and how
to record your game play. Opening, middle- and endgame play is
discussed, and game examples are provided. You are advised to
have your chess set constructed before studying Part 11, because
much of what has been written, such as game-play examples,
can only be fully understood when you personally move the
pieces on the board while reading the text.
Parts I11 and IV have been written for those interested in
divination and the esoteric sciences connected with Enochian


xxx Enochian Chess of the Golden Dawn

chess. If you are interested in these areas, it is assumed that
you have some grounding in the symbology of the occult or that
you are interested enough to obtain the necessary reference
material so that you can understand these sections.
Those interested in Parts I11 and IV will no doubt wish to
read Parts I and I1 to get a basic understanding of game play
and to construct their boards and pieces.
Part I11 is called the Book of Water and covers the divina-
tion teaching in Enochian chess.
Part IV is called the Book of Fire, Training of the Adept.
This section provides some of the magical teachings connected
with Enochian chess.
I have written this book with the view that it is only a foun-
dation for the serious student from which he or she can launch
off into many areas of in-depth study. For those who do not wish
to enter into studies on the subject but simply wish to enjoy the
"game," I think you will find the information provided satisfac-
tory. I would like to wish the reader enjoyable reading and
many happy hours with Enochian chess, which I have had.


Part I

Book of Earth

Introduction

Constructing Your Enochian Chess Set



The Enochian System

of Magic and Its

Relationship to

Enochian Chess

##### T

he Enochian system of magic1 was first introduced to the
world on any large scale through the works of various
authors such as Heinrich Cornelius ~~ri~~a,~ Pietro
d'Abano3 and Johann ~rithemius~ in fragments of seals
and a variety of angelic names given in connection with varying
aspects of occultism. It was not until the late 16th century that
Elizabethan scholar Dr. John ~ee~ considered that, since Bibli-

1. This was dubbed Enochian due to the fact that the dictating angel was Ave,
who was mentioned in the Biblical book of Enoch.
2. See De occulta philosophia, n.p., 1533.
3. See Heptameron oder de elemente der magic, partly given in Agrippa's Fourth
Book of Occult Philosophy, trans. Robert Turner, London: Askin Press, 1976.
4. See Steganographia, Frankfurt, 1606.
5. For information on Dee's life, see John Dee: The World of an Elizabethan
Magus by Peter J. French (Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1984).


```
4 Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
cal man of the Old Testament could speak with the angels, why
not man in what was then modern times? Driven by an inner
desire to converse with God or his entities, he eventually found
an exceptional clairvoyant by the name of Edward Kelly. The
manner in which he was to make this contact was through a
"shewstone," or small crystal, in which visions would appear to
someone clairvoyantly inclined.
Over a number of years of working with Kelly, Dee recorded
all the information he received through these conversations. In
many instances, they explained rather fully the gaps in the
hierarchies of the angelic entities given many years earlier by
Agrippa and the like.6 In the next half century some of Dee's
diaries were published based on the manuscripts in the British
Museum library7 and gained a certain notoriety in occult cir-
cles. This led many occultists to study the Dee manuscripts
even further.
In the late 19th century, Wynn Westcott and MacGregor
Mathers both worked diligently to update this system of magic
to integrate it into the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn,
which they had established.' As yet another subsystem to this
system of magic, they incorporated a four-handed chess game,
which they originally called Rosicrucian chess (later dubbed
Enochian chess), which was used for a simple game of chess and
for di~ination.~ The main connection with the Enochian system
```
6. Manuscript references to Dee's diaries in the British Museum are Sloane
78, art 11-3188-3 189-3191-3677-3678.
7. See A True & Faithful Relation of What passed for many Yeers Between Dr.
John Dee and Some Spirits by Meric. Casaubon, London, 1659.
8. See The Magicians of the Golden Dawn by Ellic Howe (Weiser, 19781, Yeats's
Golden Dawn by George M. Harper (Macmillan, 1974) and My Rosicrucian
Adventure by Israel Regardie (Llewellyn, 1977) for historical references. See
The Golden Dawn by Regardie (Llewellyn, 1971) and Secret Inner Order Ritu-
als of the Golden Dawn by Patrick J. Zalewski (Falcon Press, 1988) for infor-
mation on their rituals and teachings along with additional historical material.
9. See The Complete Golden Dawn System of Magic (Falcon Press, 1984) for
the Order's papers on the subject.


```
The Enochian System of Magic 5
```
was that the boards that were used were derived from four
major tablets that Dee constantly used in his original system of
magic. lo* l1
The four elemental boards are in fact broken down into the
following categories: the large Central Cross which binds the
four quarters together represents the refined power of the plan-
ets in the astrological signs. The cross bar of this Central Cross
then gives the Holy ~amel~ or controlling influence or force of
the entire tablet. The four smaller crosses in each quarter main-
ly represent the energies of the planets, while the four squares
above each smaller cross are the incorporeal elements. The
squares below the small crosses are dubbed the Servient
Squares and relate to the 12 signs of the Zodiac and the four
elements proper. These are the squares used to construct the
Enochian chessboards.13 While the chess pieces themselves are
Egyptian, the main framework from which they operate is the
chessboards from the Enochian Tablets and their various asso-
ciations to numerous forms of magic and occultism. They are
considered Enochian by virtue of that fact.

10. For a breakdown of the functions of the Enochian hierarchies of each of
these boards, see "How the Golden Dawn Works Enochian Magic" by C.R.
Runyon, Portal, Winter 1989. This article is mainly an edited transcript of a
lecture given by Pat Zalewski in Los Angeles in January 1988.
11. In the National Library of Ireland, manuscript 13568(2), quoted in part in
The Sword of Wisdom by Ithell Colquhoun (Putnam's, 1975), a Celtic varia-
tion of Enochian chess is given by William Butler Yeats. The only real simi-
larity between this game and Enochian chess is the fact that there are four
elemental boards, but these bear no relationship to the Enochian Tablets.
There are no references to Enochiana in the original Yeats manuscript; with-
out it, the game simply becomes a Celtic chess game. See 'W. B. Yeats' Celtic
Version of Enochian Chess" by Pat Zalewski, Magus, Autumn 1981.
12. Reading from left to right.
13. The shaded areas are the ones shown in figure 1.


```
6 Part I-Book of Earth
```
Key:
The lightly shaded squares are the Servient Squares from
which the chessboards are made up.
The more darkly shaded squares are the Kerubic Squares.
The small crosses in the corners of each Tablet are the Calvary
Crosses.
The large cross in the center is called the Central Cross.


```
The Enochian System of Magic 7
```
There are a number of variations in the Enochian Tablets
used within the Golden Dawn and its later offshoots. The ver-
sion given here is taken from the New Zealand Whare Ra Tem-
ple after the Tablets were "correctedn by Euan Campbell, a
former member of that temple who reached the rank of 9=2.
Campbell persuaded Mrs. Felkin, who was then in charge of
Whare Ra, to change the letters from the Golden Dawn version
to those presented here in the 1930s, after his return from Eng-
land, where he had taken a year's sabbatical to study the Dee
manuscripts in the British Museum library.


8 Part I-Book of Earth


The Enochian System of Magic^9


```
10 Part I-Book of Earth
```
It is very difficult to explain simply the Golden Dawn's use of
the four Enochian Tablets. A detailed analysis of the Order's
Enochian system is provided by Israel Regardie in his Complete
Golden Dawn System of Magic and by Pat Zalewski in Golden
Dawn Enochian Magic (Llewellyn, 1990). Briefly, however, the
Golden Dawn considered that any force invoked or evoked for
ritual had to be limited and controlled by a very powerful neu-
tral force. The structure of the Enochian Tablets gave the magi-
cians of the Golden Dawn that control.
It is the hidden or subliminal aspects of the chessboards
that turn the mundane into the magical, a term I do not use
lightly. I seriously suggest that, if you wish to study the Enochi-
an chess game, you should first make a thorough study of the
Order's Enochian system. This well-spent effort will definitely
afford you a better concept of how the game is played.


Chaturanga

### W

ithout doubt the origins of the Enochian chess game were
fused in the ashes of the Indian game of four-handed
chess called ~haturan~a.'?~ It was recorded as being
played four or five thousand years ago,3 though its actual
origins are obscure. Some noted chess historians have attrib-

1. For a full study on Chaturanga, see H.J.R. Murray's History of Chess
(Oxford, 19131, which covers the subject exhaustively and corrects many of the
errors that occur in the previous work of Duncan Forbes and Edward
Falkener. The brief rendition of the subject given here is merely an introduc-
tion to it as the foundation of Enochian chess.
2. Chatur = "four," ranga = "member."
3. See Sir William Jones, Asiatic Researches 2, 1788, wherein he places the
game's origin at around 4,000 years previous to the current date. In his His-
tory of Chess (18601, Duncan Forbes places it around 4-5,000 years ago. My
own researches place it around the 5th or 6th century AD. Anything earlier is
pure speculation.


```
12 Part I-Book of Earth
```
uted the invention of the game to Sita, a concubine of Ravana,
king of Celyon (or Sri Lanka as it is now known). As tradition
has it, she used to watch the warlords of the king plan their
strategy to defend the city of Lanka against the onslaught of
Rama, her former husband. Each day miniature troops were
moved into their attacking positions and the king would order
counterattacks. Ravana noted a pattern forming that could be
detected. Using the prospects of chance to find the outcome of
the battles, a die was used. She began by modifying certain
aspects of army strategy that she had learned. She found, with
great accuracy, that she could predict the outcome of the ensu-
ing battles around her. The pattern was then set, using dice and
miniature pieces to predetermine the outcome of battles in
much the same manner as war games are played today.
The pieces utilized were a rajah (king), elephant (castle),
horse (knight), ship (bishop) and four pawns for each corner sec-
tion of the board. These corner sections were red, green, yellow
and black. The king, castle and knight move the same as they
do in modern chess, while the bishop always moves two squares
diagonally. The king cannot be checkmated, but is simply taken
like any other piece. However, all his forces are then captured
by the enemy-or even by his ally if they are in the way. If both
the king and an enemy king are captured, they can by mutual
consent be restored to the game.
In this very early game, dice were used to decide what piece
to move. It seems most unlikely that a chessboard of 64 squares
was used with the war game from the outset, but the board does
resemble that used in a very early Indian game of racing called
~shta~ada.~ It is thought that this board was eventually
adapted for Chaturanga around the 6th or 7th century. Some
authors such as Stewart Culin (Chess and Playing Cards, 1898)
consider the board to be a breakdown of the four seasons.
To get a clear description of the game as it was originally
played is almost impossible except for one shining example in

4. See Thomas Hyde, De ludis orientalibus (1694).


```
Ckaturanga 13
```
the ~thitattaua.~ The text takes up where Vyasa (the narrator
of the poem) tells Prince Yudishthira (grandson of Brahma) how
to play Chaturanga after he lost all his possessions playing dice
and went to learn the science of gambling from learned ~~asa.~

```
Explain, 0 supereminent in virtue, the game on the eight
times eight board:
Tell me, 0 my master, how the Chatarunga may be played.
Vyasa replied:
On the board of eight squares place the Red forces in the East,
the Green forces in the South, on the West station the Yel-
low forces and the Black combatants in the North.
To the left of the Rajah, 0 Prince, place the Elephant, then the
Horse, the Ship; and then four Foot-soldiers in front.
Opposite, place the Ship in the angle, 0 Son of Kunti; the
Horse in the second square, the Elephant in the third and
the Rajah in the fourth.
In front of each place a Foot-soldier. On throwing five, play a
Foot-soldier or a Rajah; if four, the Elephant:
If three, the Horse; if two, then, 0 Prince, the Ship must move.
The Rajah moves one square in any direction.
The Foot-soldier moves one square forward, and takes diago-
nally; the Elephant can move at will-North, South, East,
or West.
The Horses move awry, crossing three squares at a time; the
Ship moves diagonally, two squares at a time, 0 Yud-
ishthira.
The following, 0 Prince, are various positions and actions in
the game:
```
5. Edward Falkener states that the version he quotes in his Games Ancient and
Oriental, and How to Play Them (Dover, 1961) comes from the Mahabharata,
which is incorrect. I have in my possession a full copy of this ancient text, and
the dice game is only mentioned in the "Sabha Parva" section, twice, and
briefly at that. For the text presented here, I have used the Albrecht Weber
translation and that of Falkener. I am indebted to Mr. Rajas of the Wellington
Indian Society, who brought two other versions in Sanskrit to my attention.
Both of these differ slightly. Based on this, some modest adjustments have
been made to this version of the text, which for the most part is identical with
Falkener's. Murray gives a version as well in his monumental History of Chess.
6. The game play here is counterclockwise.


14 Part I-Book of Earth

```
Sinhasana, Chaturaji, Nrtipakrishta, Shatpada, Kakakash-
tha, Vrihannauka, Naukakrishtapracaraka.
The Foot-soldier and the Ship may take; or run the risk, 0
Yudhishthira; the Rajah, Elephant and Horse may take,
but must avoid being taken.
A player should guard his forces with all possible care. The
Rajah, 0 Prince, is the most powerful of all.
The most powerful may be lost, if the weaker, 0 son of Kunti,
are not protected. As the Rajah's chief piece is the Ele-
phant, all others must be sacrificed to save it.
To enable the Rajah to obtain Sinhasana or Chaturaji, all
other pieces, even the Elephant, may be sacrificed.
If a Rajah enters the square of another Rajah, 0 Yud-
hishthira, he is said to have gained Sinhasana.
If he gains the Sinhasana, he takes the Rajah. He gains a dou-
ble stake: otherwise a single one.
If a Rajah, 0 Prince, mounts the throne of his ally, he gains a
Sinhasana, and commands both forces.
If a Rajah, in seeking Sinhasana, moves six squares away, he
exposes himself to danger, however secure he thinks
himself.
If you still preserve your Rajah, and the other Rajahs, you
obtain Chaturanji.
In gaining Chaturanji, and taking the other Rajahs, you gain
a double stake: otherwise, a single one.
If a Rajah takes the other Rajahs on their own thrones then
his stakes are fourfold.
If both a Sinhasana and Chaturaji are obtained, only the lat-
ter can be reckoned.
If you have taken a Rajah, and your ally has lost one of his,
you may propose of prisoners.
But if you have neither of the other Rajahs, and your ally has
lost one, you must try to take one of the other Rajahs.
If a Rajah has been restored, and is taken again, 0 Yud-
hishthira, he cannot be destroyed.
When a Foot-soldier reaches an opposite square, other than of
a Rajah or Ship, he assumes the rank of the piece corre-
sponding to each square.
If Chaturaji and Shatpada, 0 Prince, are both obtainable,
Chaturanji will have preference.
If the Shatpada is reached on the square of the Rajah or Ship,
it does not have the privilege of Shatpada.
When a Foot-soldier, after many moves, gains the seventh
```

```
Chaturanga 15
```
```
square, the defenceless forces on the opposite side can eas-
ily be taken.
0 Son of Kunti, if the player, however, has three Foot-soldiers
remaining, he cannot take his Shatpada-so decrees
Gotma.
But if he has only one Foot-soldier and a Ship, the piece is
called Gadha and he may take his Shatpada in any square
he can.
If a Rajah has lost all his pieces before being taken, it is
Kakakashtha, so decide all the Rakshasahs. It is a drawn
game.
If the Gadha, on gaining the Shatpada and becoming a fifth
Rajah, is taken, it is misfortune for the pieces which
remain who will have to fight the enemy.
If this happens a second time, the conqueror then sweeps off
all the pieces.
But if, 0 Prince, Kakakashtha and Sinhasana occur together,
it is counted as Sinhasana, and is not called Kakakashtha.
When three Ships come together and the fourth Ship com-
pletes the square, the fourth Ship takes the other three
ships.
This fourth Ship is called Vrihannauka.
Never place an Elephant where it can be taken by another
Elephant.
But if impossible to make any other move, then, 0 Prince,
Gotama says it may be done.
If you can take both the hostile Elephants, take that to the
left.
```
Chaturanga found its way into Persia around 550 AD during
the reign of Naushirawan and it is here that it underwent a
drastic change into a game that was eventually called Sha-
tranji. The actual history of how the chess game came to Persia
is recorded in the Karnamak-i-Artakh Shatr-i-Papakan, the ori-
gin of which is estimated at 600 AD. Later works of poetry such
as Shahnama also describe chess history as well. During this
time there is evidence that the use of dice was done away with
and the four corners were changed to two straight lines facing
each other, though in India it remained basically the same. In
the book Enochian or Rosicrucian Chess of Wynn Westcott,
edited by Adam McLean, McLean makes the observation that


```
16 Part I-Book of Earth
```
Westcott must have made himself very familiar with Chatu-
ranga from The History of Chess by Duncan Forbes. The
alliance of the game with the elements is very plain to see, and
the differences between the two games consists merely of a thin
veil and a different power base.


Constructing

Your

Chessboards

##### T

his chapter discusses the construction of the Enochian
chessboards and the coloring and attributions given there-
on. The meanings of the attributions described below are
discussed further in Part 111.
Four chessboards are constructed for Enochian chess. They
are derived from the Servient Squares of the Angelic Watchtow-
ers, which are the four elemental Enochian Tablets. For those
who wish to investigate this Enochian system further, I suggest
you read The Golden Dawn by Israel Regardie and Golden Dawn
Enochian Magic by Pat Zalewski, both published by Llewellyn
Publications. Each chessboard is identical in size, with 64
squares in each, set out 8-by-8, just as a normal chessboard. How-
ever, the difference between each of the four boards is seen in
their pattern of coloring and the attributions painted thereon.
There are many different materials that can be used for
your chessboards: heavy cardboard, hardboard, wood, canvas,


```
18 Part I-Book of Earth
```
fabric material etc., but the most effective, if used for anything
other than a simple chess game, is a surface that can be made
to shine with strong, bright (flashing) colors. Suitable coloring
materials must also be obtained. The most common are high-
gloss enamel paints of the three primary colors (red, blue and
yellow), black, white and the three colors that are complemen-
tary to the primaries: purple, orange and green. If you do not
have a high gloss, spray or paint on a high-gloss lacquer after
the boards have been painted and dried.
To paint straight lines freehand is extremely difficult and
you may prefer not to paint your boards. A method that avoids
painting is to cut your pyramid shapes out of shiny colored
paper or card and paste them onto your boards, then cover the
boards with a strong, clear plastic for a smooth, shiny finish.
Whatever materials you use, your purpose should be to aim for
an end product that is flashing in color, hence the term "flash-
ing tablets," which produce a talismatic effect.
The four Enochian chessboards are considered elemental
boards and are individually identified as follows:

Chessboard 1 is associated with the element of Earth and
therefore is referred to as the :'Earth Board."

Chessboard 2 is associated with the element of Air and
therefore is referred to as the "Air Board."

Chessboard 3 is associated with the element of Water and
therefore is referred to as the "Water Board."

Chessboard 4 is associated with the element of Fire and
therefore is referred to as the "Fire Board."

Before we continue it is necessary to point out that all four
boards are not used at once in the same game. Only one board at
a time is used during any particular game. Therefore, if you are
constructing this set purely for strategical game play and not for
use in divination or as part of your occult studies, I suggest you
only construct one chessboard, preferably the Earth Board. In


```
Constructing Your Chessboards 19
```
fact, I would further advise that, instead of constructing your
board with the color system and occult attributions as described
below, you should use the method given on page 30 under the
heading "Alternative Method of Constructing Your Enochian
Chess Set."
If you draw a horizontal line directly through the middle of
each elemental board, and another vertical line through the
middle from top to bottom, your boards will then be divided into
four equal sections of 16 squares each. These sections are rep-
resentative again of the four elements, showing four principle
actions of each element, and are referred to as the "Lesser
Angles." The top left-hand angle in each board is the Air Angle.
The top right-hand angle in each board is the Water Angle. The
bottom right-hand angle is the Fire Angle, and the bottom left-
hand angle the Earth Angle. These divisions then, within each
board, signify an element within an element. For example:

```
Fire Board:
Fire Angle of Fire Board (lower right) = Fiery part of Fire
Water Angle of Fire Board (upper right) = Watery part of
Fire
Air Angle of Fire Board (upper left) = Airy part of Fire
Earth Angle of Fire Board (lower left) = Earthy part of
Fire
Water Board:
Fire Angle of Water Board (lower right) = Fiery part of
Water
Water Angle of Water Board (upper right) = Watery part
of Water
Air Angle of Water Board (upper left) = Airy part of Water
Earth Angle of Water Board (lower left) = Earthy part of
Water
Air Board:
Fire Angle of Air Board (lower right) = Fiery part of Air
Water Angle of Air Board (upper right) = Watery part of
Air
```

20 Part I-Book of Earth

```
Air Angle of Air Board (upper left) = Airy part of Air
Earth Angle of Air Board (lower left) = Earthy part of Air
```
```
Earth Board:
Fire Angle of Earth Board (lower right) = Fiery part of
Earth
Water Angle of Earth Board (upper right) = Watery part
of Earth
Air Angle of Earth Board (upper left) = Airy part of Earth
Earth Angle of Earth Board (lower left) = Earthy part of
Earth
```
It would suffice at this point to say that the four boards rep-
resenting the four elements are simply reflections of the four
aspects of nature. A good example of this is to apply the quali-
ties of heat and dryness to Fire, cold and moisture to Water,
heat and moisture to Air, and cool and dryness to Earth. These
are of course the cornerstones on which the esoteric sciences are
built and have been recognized as such since the beginning of
recorded history.
Each square of the boards is divided into four flat faces, and
if you look down onto a square, it has the appearance of a pyra-
mid shape, which in fact is what it is. Each face of a chess
square is then the face of a vast pyramid of power. There are
four schools of thought as to the make-up of these pyramid
squares. The original Golden Dawn Enochian chess set pyramid
squares had truncated tops. The squares were colored according
to their attributions, but the actual attributions were not drawn
thereon until the Adept began using the game for divination,
when the attributions became necessary. The truncated tops
were left blank without the Enochian letters from the Tablets
inscribed on them. One of the reasons the Golden Dawn did not
use the Enochian letters on the chessboards was simply
because, if all the Servient Squares were placed together and
the angelic hierarchy that binds them (i.e., the great Central
Cross, Calvary Cross, and Kerubic Squares) were omitted, there
would be a slightly chaotic situation in which the power emitted


```
Constructing Your Chessboards 2 1
```
by the chessboards would only be from the lower angelic forces
fragmented in each particular corner. If you decide to place all
the attributions on the boards, I suggest that you place the syrn-
bol of Spirit (@) in the truncated pyramid top. These forces are
then bound together to an acceptable level through the unseen
forces of Spirit.
Another way is to omit the use of the white truncated pyra-
mid top completely, as shown by Regardie. If this is done, a
white border must be placed around the outside of each board to
contain the forces therein. In this case there are some who still
paint on the attributions and others who prefer to leave the
attributions off. In my own experience I have found that, for
those who are fully familiar with the symbology of the Enochi-
an chessboards, and what square represents what, it is not nec-
essary to draw the attributions. They act merely as a visual
reminder as to what each square represents. If you prefer to
have your flashing boards without their attributions painted on
them, perhaps you could draw up a reference chart that you can
keep near your boards when playing.
Ultimately it must be up to the individual person who makes
a chess set to decide on the design. Examples of each element
board, the colors and attributions drawn on the squares, are given
in the following diagrams. Although all given symbols are drawn
onto your boards in the order given in the following diagrams,
some of the symbols therein also double as codes as to what color
is given to each triangle within each square. These are:

symbolizes Fire and its triangle is colored red with all
symbols drawn thereon in green.
symbolizes Water and its triangle is colored blue with all
symbols drawn thereon in orange.

a symbolizes Air and its triangle is colored yellow with all
symbols drawn thereon in mauve.

```
vsymbolizes Earth and its triangle is colored black with all
symbols drawn thereon in white.
```

22 Part I-Book of Earth

The truncated top of each pyramid is colored white and any
symbol thereon is black, although the old Golden Dawn manu-
scripts show no symbol drawn thereon.
The actual size of the chessboards is entirely up to you, but
they should be in proportion to the size of the chess pieces that
you construct.

```
FIGURE 5-SYMBOLOGY OF THE EARTH BOARD
```


FIGURE 7-SYMBOLOGY OF THE WATER BOARD


FIGURE 8-SYMBOLOGY OF THE FIRE BOARD


```
26 Part I-Book of Earth
```
The formula that gave the layout of the attributions, as
given in figures 5 to 8, is through four specific permutations of
~etra~rammaton. ' Tetragrammaton refers to the divine name
as given in Hebrew Kabbalistic teachings and is identified in
the English language by the letters YHVH (Hebrew 717'),
which simply means "to be" or "in e~istence."~
Y is the word 'Yod and representative of the elemental
force of Fire. There are three signs of the Zodiac associated with
the Fire element, and they are Aries (r), Leo (0) and Sagittar-
ius (3). Fire is considered a positive/masculine energy.
H is the word "Heh" and representative of the elemental
force of Water. There are three signs of the Zodiac associated
with the Water element, which are Cancer (s), Scorpio (T(L)
and Pisces of). Water is considered a negativelfeminine energy.
V is the word "Vau" and representative of the elemental
force of Air. There are three signs of the Zodiac associated with
the Air element, which are Libra (e), Aquarius (=) and Gemi-
ni (n). Air is considered a positivelmasculine energy.
H (final), which will be subsequently abbreviated as "Hf," is
the word "Heh." This is different from the first "Heh" and is rep-
resentative of the elemental force of Earth. The three signs of
the Zodiac associated are Capricorn (M), Taurus (8) and Virgo
(m). Earth is considered a negativelfeminine energy.
The astrological system of quadruplicities is also associated
with the Tetragrammaton; these are the Cardinal, Fixed and
Mutable signs. Cardinal is an initiating, active energy and
likened to the Fire element and therefore the Yod force. Fixed is
a set, concentrative but penetrating energy and is likened to the
Water element and therefore the "Heh" force. Mutable is

1. These four permutations of the Name are associated with four tribes of
Israel which are in turn associated with the four Cardinal signs: Aries, Can-
cer, Libra and Capricorn.
2. See The Holy Kabbalah by A.E. Waite (19291, The Kabbalah Unveiled by
S.L. MacGregor Mathers (Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1926) and Kabbalah by
Charles Ponc6 (Straight Arrow, 1973) for further information on Tetragram-
maton.


```
Constructing Your Chessboards 27
```
changeable, flexible but harmonious, and likened to the Air ele-
ment and therefore the "Vau" force. The Earth element (Hf) is
made up of the other three elements and therefore represents
the four elements in their more manifested form. Each of the
four elements has one Cardinal Zodiac sign, one Fixed sign and
one Mutable sign, therefore showing the different phases and
manifestations of each element.
The attributions on the squares of the chessboards are
worked out through a rank and column formula using the let-
ters of Tetragrammaton. The order of Tetragrammaton on each
board is worked out using the letter of the element of each angle
as the starting point. However, there is a set direction in which
each board is read, shown by the arrows in the diagrams below.
For example, the Air and Water Boards are read from right to
left horizontally in the upper quarters and left to right horizon-
tally in the lower quarters (mirror image). The Fire and Earth
Boards are read left to right horizontally in the upper quarters
and left to right horizontally in the lower quarters. To get the
vertical order of Tetragrammaton, the corner letter of the active
angles (Fire and Air Angles) goes to the fourth square down and
the rest of the letters from the angle are read in duplicate to the
horizontal towards the corner. The corner letter of the passive
angles (Earth and Water Angles) goes to the corner square and
the rest of the letters are read duplicate to the horizontal out
from the ~orner.~

3. "The Book of Concealed Mystery," found in the Mathers translation entitled
The Kabbalah Unveiled, throws much more light on the various aspects of
Tetragrammaton and shows the placing of the chess pieces, discussed later in
this book, which, when seen through the eyes of an Enochian chess player,
opens up new levels of game tactics.


```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
t-
VHYHfYHfVH VHYHfYHfVH
```
```
Part of Part of
Water
YV
```
```
Airy
Part of
Air
```
```
Earthy
Part of
Air
```
```
Earthy Fiery
Part of Part of
water Water
H Hf
HfY HVHVHfY
```
```
Watery
Part of
Air
```
```
Fiery
Part of
Air
```
```
L AIR BOARD WATER BOARD / '
3
A+
7'
VHfY H VHfY H VHfY HVHfY H^4
```
```
HfY VHHVHfV
```
```
Airs.
Part of
Earth
```
```
Earthy
Part of
Earth
```
```
Earthy Fiery
Part of Part of
Fire Fire
Hf
```
```
H
Y
Hf
v
```
```
HfVHYHfVHY HfVHYHfVHY
```
```
Watery
Part of
Earth
```
```
Fiery
Part of
Earth
```
```
FIGURE 9--ORDER OF TETRAGRAMMATON APPLIED TO THE
ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS
```
```
H
Y
H f
v
Y
H
v
Hf
```
```
Watery
Part of
Fire
```
The formula for working the attributions to the chess
squares is the order of Tetragrammaton through a column and
rank system. The top of the boards are always the Air and
Water Angles. The columns are the vertical rows of squares,
and the ranks are the horizontal rows of squares.

```
Watery
Part of
Fire
```

```
Constructing Your Chessboards 29
```
```
TABLE I-ASTROLOGICAL ATTRIBUTION TO TETRAGRAMMATON
```
For reference, the pyramid faces of each chess square may
be numbered thus:

```
Rank
Y
H
v
Hf
```
```
Triangle 1 shows the element color of the element board
(e.g., red for Fire Board, blue for Water Board, yellow for Air,
black for Earth), symbol of the element and astrological attri-
bution (Zodiac sign-see Table I) in complementary color.
Triangle 2 shows the color of the elemental association of
the letter of Tetragrammaton ruling the column and the ele-
```
```
Column
Y
Cardinal
T
%
A -
```
b3

```
V
Mutable
Y
x
II
m'
```
```
H
Fixed
6-1
m3
```
- -
    8

```
H
Element
n
v
A
7
```

30 Part I-Book of Earth

ment symbol itself. Also shown is the Tarot trump that relates
to the astrological attribution of triangle 1 (refer to figures 1 to
4 for the complete associations and their relationships).
Triangle 3 shows the elemental color of the Lesser Angle of
the board together with its symbol and geomantic figure, which
is associated with the Zodiacal sign of triangle 1.
Triangle 4 shows the elemental color of the letter of Tetra-
grammaton ruling the rank and its elemental symbol, and the
Hebrew letter associated with the Tarot trump of triangle 2.

Therefore, referring back to Table I, where two Yods meet,
you will know that the square they meet in will be associated
with Aries (Cardinal Fire force), and all other attributions on
that square will be similarly associated; e.g., Tarot trump, The
Emperor; geomantic figure, Puer; Hebrew letter "Heh." Where a
Heh and a Vau meet, the square will be attributed to Aquarius
and all the other attributions follow.

```
Alternative Method of Constructing
Your Chess Set
```
For the chess enthusiast and those who do not want to pursue
the esoteric side of Enochian chess, or go to the trouble of mak-
ing elaborately colored boards, you can purchase two very cheap
modern chess sets. Take one board and color the edges or out-
side borders of the four quarters each in a different elemental
color. In this way each angle will represent an element, similar
to the Enochian chessboards. For example, the top left-hand
quarter of the board will have its border colored yellow, the top
right-hand colored blue, the bottom right-hand colored red and
the bottom left-hand colored black. The chessboard itself
remains with black and white squares.
The coloring of the borders enables angle identification for
your four sets of chess pieces. From the two sets of modern
chess pieces bought with the boards, divide them up into four
sets of five pieces and four pawns each; i.e., one king, queen,
knight, bishop and rook and four pawns per set. Each elemental


```
Constructing Your Chessboards 3 1
```
set can be identified by coloring it the color of the elemental
angle that it represents. A pocket four-handed chess set can be
created this way.
It is important for you to realize that, once the flashing col-
ors of the boards and pieces are omitted, the game ceases to be
an Enochian chess game and becomes simply a four-handed
chess game. I personally have one such set that I use quite reg-
ularly when working out game strategy or playing simply for
pleasure. One would use the fully constructed flashing set for
divination play. I do not wish to give the impression that I use
the small set all the time; I do not. Each has its place, and expe-
riencing the full impact of the Enochian set even for game
strategy on a regular basis is a must, but a small set is handy
when one is traveling or playing by correspondence, because it
is not good from an esoteric viewpoint to leave a fully colored
Enochian set exposed unattended for any length of time.



Constructing the

Chess

Pieces

###### E

nochian chess pieces and pawns are constructed in the
images of Egyptian god pantheons. Like the chessboards,
these pieces represent certain energies and archetypes
(which are discussed in length in Part 111, Divination).
There are four sets of pieces and pawns, each set representing a
different pantheon and each a particular element, thereby rul-
ing an elemental chessboard.
There are two schools of thought as to the sets of chess
pieces. One uses an Egyptian pantheon of five pieces and four
pawns per set, each representing an angle of the chess board,
thereby playing the four pantheons on one board: the Fire pan-
theon set on the Fire Angle, the Water pantheon set on the
Water Angle and so on. The other method plays one pantheon
per board, and the element of the angle upon which each set
plays is identified by the color of the base of each piece.
Within the Golden Dawn, the most common approach was to
have the four different pantheons playing on one board, one


34 Part I-Book of Earth

pantheon in each corner. This, however, was done to save time
and effort: constructing a complete pantheon for each different
board required a great deal of work, and only a few within the
Golden Dawn attempted this. However, it has become common
practice to simply use one pantheon on all boards (the main
pantheon attributed to the Earth Board) and ignore the others.
One of the reasons for this is that the Earth pieces are in fact
the main god-forms and the others are merely variants of them.
This is all very well when playing the game as a form of strate-
gy, but when you get into divination, this method shows limita-
tions. The quick and easy method of four pantheons played
together on one board, for each of the four boards, is probably
far better suited for the chess game overall.
The size of your chess pieces and the material used to con-
struct them is entirely up to you. In the old Golden Dawn, two-
dimensional figures were made up on hard cardboard and stuck
onto or slid into a small piece of grooved wood that acted as a
stand to hold the cards upright. Many people, however, used the
card cutouts flat on the chess boards. I prefer to use three-dimen-
sional figures. These can be made out of modeling clay, fiber glass,
ceramics, wood, marble etc. The choice is yours, just as long as you
use a material that can be easily painted with flashing colors.
The coloring of the chess pieces may also be done two differ-
ent ways. The first and easiest way is to color the front and base
of the piece with the color of the element of the angle it repre-
sents; e.g., red for the Fire Angle, blue for the Water Angle, yel-
low for the Air Angle and black for the Earth Angle. The back of
the piece is colored according to the element represented by the
piece itself; e.g., King, white for Spirit; Knight, red for Fire, the
Yod force; Queen, blue for Water, the Heh force; Bishop, yellow
for Air, the Vau force; Rook, black for Earth, the Heh(f) force.
The second method of coloring is more imaginative and is
taken from the "Colouring of the Gods of Egypt who rule above
the Pyramids of the sixteen servient Angels and squares."'

1. From the "Concourse of Forces" manuscript, which is partly given in
Regardie's Golden Dawn.


```
Constructing the Chess Pieces 35
```
```
TABLE 11-40~-FORM NAMES AND THEIR PIECE ATTRIBUTIONS~
```
```
Each set of five pieces for each pantheon represents the
operation of Spirit and the four Elemental rulers, the five points
of the pentagram, the five letters of YHShVH, the Tarot Ace
and the Court cards. Each piece is either throned or standing,
depending on what sex it represents, using the father, mother,
son and daughter concept. The masculine or active principles
are always on the move and hence are standing, while the fem-
inine or passive principles are more stable. The power behind
them both is of course the King, who as Spirit is more of a guid-
ing force than a front-line figure. As such, he is throned.
```
The Pawns and Their Elemental Associations

```
Water Set
Ptah ha Pan-Lses
Sebek
Thouriest
Hapimon
Shooen
(Shooeu-tha-ist)
```
```
Earth Set
Osiris
Horus
Isis
Aroueris
Nephthys
```
```
Piece
King
Knight
Queen
Bishop
Rook
```
```
Piece
King
Knight
Queen
Bishop
Rook
```
The pawn's god-forms, images and names do not change, no
matter what pantheon they are placed in front of. Therefore,
you will have four identical sets of pawns per board. The angle

```
Fire Set
Chnupis Kneph
Ra
Sati-Ashtoreth
Toum
Anouke
```
```
Air Set
Socharis
Seb
Knousou Pekht
Shu Zoan
Tharpeshest-Jefine-pasht
```
2. Some of these names differ from the Regardie publication. These c\urrent
names are taken from copies of Wynn Westcott's chess notebook, which was at
Whare Ra.


```
36 Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
they belong to in play is defined by the color of their bases
(black for the Earth Angle etc.). They are the vice-regents to the
four elemental pieces, and thereby singularly associated. At the
beginning of game play, a pawn is placed only in front of the
piece it serves. These pawns are the four god-forms of the Chil-
dren of Horus:
```
```
TABLE 111-FOUR PAWNS AND THEIR ASSOCIATIONS
```
```
The King has no single pawn; all the pieces and pawns of its
angle are its vice-regents.
```
Coloring and Descriptions of the Chess Pieces

```
Image
Hawk
head
Dog
head
Ape
head
Human
head
```
Not too long ago, Adam McLean published copies of the chess
pieces of Wynn Westcott that had been uncovered by Bob
Gilbert. The following diagrams are not copies of Westcott's
chess pieces, but are taken from a Whare Ra chess set copied
from that of a former chief of that temple. A photo of one of the
Whare Ra sets was sent to McLean for purposes of comparison
before he published the Westcott pieces.

```
Name
Kabexnuv
```
```
Tmoumthph
```
```
Ahephi
```
```
Ameshet
```
```
Regent
Knight
```
```
Queen
```
```
Bishop
```
```
Rook
```
```
Elemental
Representation
Fire, Air, Earth
```
```
Water, Air, Earth
```
```
Air, Fire, Water
```
```
Earth, Fire,
Water
```
```
Prime
Element
Fire
```
```
Water
```
```
Air
```
```
Earth
```


```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Earth Pantheon
```
Osiris-Spirit of Earth, Tarot Ace of Disks. Osiris (fig. 12) is
classed as the Silent One, and represents Spirit. He is a beard-
ed, mummified figure of a man who sits on a black and white
throne. In his left hand he bears a yellow scourge and crook; in
his right hand is a green phoenix wand. He wears a striped col-
lar of red, blue, yellow and black to represent all the elements.
On his white conical crown he has twin green feathers, with a
red cross representing Spirit. His face and hands are green with
black and white striped arm bands, and he has a black menat
hanging from the back of his neck. His name in Coptic is pro-
nounced Aeshoori. (Note: The name in English is written on one
side of the base of the piece, while the Coptic letters are written
on the other side of the base.) The central stripes on the King's
arm bands relate to the element he represents, while the outer
stripes are a complementary color. All arm bands, wristbands
and ankle bands of the other god-forms represent the color of
their sub-element, and the outer stripes represent the elemen-
tal angle.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
Earth Pantheon (continued)
Horus-Fire of Earth, Tarot Knight of Disks. Horus (fig. 13) is
the Fiery avenging force of Spirit. He stands ready to stride for-
ward. He has a hawk's head and the crown of the North and
South united, showing a red conical top with a white base and
yellow plume. His nemyss is black with red knots. In his left
hand he holds a green phoenix wand and in his right hand a
green ankh. His skin is naturally colored, and he wears a black
skirt with a red skirt wrap, shoulder straps and belt (which has
a yellow pouch in front of it). The wristbands, ankle bands, arm
bands and collar are black and red striped. The base on which
he stands is black. His name in Coptic is Hoooor.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Earth Pantheon (continued)
```
Isis-Water of Earth, Tarot Queen of Disks. Isis (fig. 14) is the
mother and beginning. She sits on a black and white throne
holding a green ankh in her right hand and a green lotus wand
with a red top in her left. Her headdress is a green symbol of the
throne and nemyss, while her arm bands and wristbands are
blue and black striped. She has a black gown and naturally col-
ored skin. Her Coptic name is Eeisest.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Earth Pantheon (continued)
```
Aroueris-Air of Earth, Tarot PrinceIKing of Disks. Aroueris
(fig. 15) represents the Airy forces of Spirit. This god-form
stands in human form holding a green phoenix wand in his left
hand and a green ankh in his right. He has a black tunic with
yellow belt, pouch and skirt wrap. The shoulder straps are also
yellow, and the collar is a combination of yellow and black
stripes, as are the wristbands, ankle bands and arm bands. The
nemyss he wears is black with yellow knots, while the conical
crown of the North and South united is white on a red base with
a yellow plume and nose guard. His skin is naturally colored,
and his Coptic name is Areeooueris.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
Earth Pantheon (continued)
Nephthys-Earth of Earth, Tarot Princess of Disks. Nephthys
(fig. 16) the Bride and force of Earth. She sits on a black and
white throne enclosed in a rectangular frame of the same color.
Her robe is black and her wristbands and arm bands are black
and white striped. In her left hand she holds a green lotus wand
with a red top, and in her right she holds a green ankh. She
wears a green nemyss with a green crescent symbol above a yel-
low, green and red rectangular headdress, which is the hiero-
glyph of her name. In Coptic her name is Neuphthusest.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Air Pantheon
```
Socharis (Seker)-Spirit of Air, Tarot Ace of Swords. Socharis
(fig. 17) is the Spirit of the force of Air, the Silent One. He is
shown as a mummified form with the head of a falcon. He wears
the white atef-crown with green and black striped feathers, a
black nemyss and yellow menat. In his left hand he holds a yel-
low crook and scourge, in his right hand a green phoenix wand.
The collar is yellow, blue and red striped. He has a red cross on
his white robe, wears purple and yellow arm bands and sits on
a yellow throne and base. His skin is colored green. In Coptic
his name is Soukaourist.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
Air Pantheon (continued)
Seb-Fire of Air, Tarot Knight/King of Swords. Seb (fig. 18) is
the avenging force of Air, He who held fast the wicked. This god-
form has a human form, standing, with naturally colored skin.
His nemyss is yellow with red knots, and a white goose, sacred
to Amen-Ra, sits upon it. The tunic he wears is yellow with a
red skirt wrap and belt with a yellow pouch. The shoulder
straps are red and his collar, wristbands, ankle bands and arm
bands are red and yellow striped. The base he stands on is yel-
low. In his left hand he holds a green phoenix wand and in his
right hand a green ankh. His skin is naturally colored. In Cop-
tic his name is Soubal.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Air Pantheon (continued)
```
Knousou Pekht-Water of Air, Tarot Queen of Swords.
Knousou Pekht (fig. 19) is a form of Nut, goddess of the sky. She
sits on a yellow and purple throne and wears a yellow robe. Her
collar is red, black, blue and yellow. Her arm bands and wrist-
bands are blue and yellow striped. In her left hand she holds a
green lotus wand with a red top and in her right a green ankh.
Her urn headdress and nemyss are green, while the base is yel-
low. Her skin is naturally colored. Her name in Coptic is
Knooou tha pekht.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
Air Pantheon (continued)
Shu Zoan-Air of Air, Tarot Kingprince of Swords. Shu Zoan
(fig. 20) is a personification of the atmosphere. He stands as if
striding forward and wears upon his head a blue and white
feather and a yellow nemyss with mauve knots. His collar, arm
bands, wristbands and ankle bands are yellow with mauve
stripes. The shoulder straps are mauve and the tunic yellow,
with a mauve skirt wrap and belt. In his left hand is a green
phoenix wand and in his right a green ankh. The base is yellow.
His name in Coptic is Zoo ooan.


3w waw

FIGURE 20-SHU ZOAN (AIR BISHOP)


```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Air Pantheon (continued)
```
Tharpeshest Jefine Pasht-Earth of Air, Tarot Princess of
Swords. Tharpeshest Jefine Pasht (fig. 21) is a form of Bast
(Sekhmet) and represents the destructive powers of the Sun.
This representation shows a lion-headed woman seated on a yel-
low and mauve throne surrounded by a yellow and mauve frame.
She is wearing a red solar disk surmounted by a yellow uraeus
serpent as a headdress with a red nemyss. Her skin is green.
She holds a green lotus with red top in her right hand and in her
left a green ankh. Her arm bands are black and yellow striped,
and she has a black belt and yellow skirt. The base she sits on is
yellow. Her Coptic name is Tharpheshst va Knooutha pe.


FIGURE 21-THARPESHEST JEFINE PASHT (AIR ROOK)


```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
Water Pantheon
Ptah ha (Ra) Pan-Lses-Spirit of Water, Tarot Ace of Cups.
The Opener of the Day, Ptah ha (Ra) Pan-Lses (fig. 22) is a
bearded, mummified man seated upon an orange and blue
throne on a blue base. His robe is white with a red belt and
cross. His nemyss is black with curved blue stripes on it. The
menat is blue. On his nemyss there is a red band on which is a
yellow lunar disk with curved horns. His skin is green, as is the
phoenix wand in his right hand. A yellow crook and scourge are
held in his left hand. His wristbands are blue and orange
striped. In Coptic his name is Ptah Katheenkeest.


PTAN HA PAN LSES"

3. I have left the above name as was given in the Y manuscript, but the Cop-
tic actually translates as Ptah Chaphen Ch6x.


```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
Water Pantheon (continued)
Sebek-Fire of Water, Tarot KnightKing of Cups. Sebek (fig.
23) is the Gatherer, a crocodile-headed man wearing a head-
dress of two small red solar disks between the two blue and
white striped plumes upon a green mount and ram's horns.
Under this is a yellow band which sits atop a blue nemyss with
red knots. His collar is blue with a red stripe running through
it, as are his wristbands, arm bands and ankle bands. His tunic
is blue with red shoulder straps, belt and skirt wrap, and he has
a yellow pouch. In his left hand he holds a green phoenix wand
and in his right hand a green ankh. His skin is green and the
base he stands on is blue. In Coptic his name is Seba Knooou
haourist tha mooou.


SEBEU

ce&a S~woa zaoap

IL" 0A MWOT

```
FIGURE ~~SEBEK (WATER KNIGHT)
```

```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Water Pantheon (continued)
```
Thoueris (Taurt)-Water of Water, Tarot Queen of Cups.
Thoueris (fig. 24) is Patroness of Childbirth and has a benevo-
lent character. She has the head of a hippopotamus (which is
partly combined with that of a crocodile) along with large
human breasts, the body of a hippopotamus-which appears to
be pregnant-the back of a crocodile and the feet of a lion. She
is seated on an orange and blue throne which has a blue base.
Her headdress has black cow horns with a red lunar disk
between them, mounted on a yellow and black headpiece which
in turn is mounted on a green nemyss. In her left hand she
holds a green lotus wand with a red top and in her right she has
a green ankh. Her collar is yellow with thin black stripes, and
her arm bands and wristbands are orange with a blue stripe
above and below, The robe she wears is blue. Her Coptic name
is Theeooour ist Thamooou.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Water Pantheon (continued)
```
Hapimoun-Air of Water, Tarot Kingffrince of Cups. Hapi-
moun (fig. 25) is god of the Nile. This representation shows a
man standing, as if striding forward. He wears a green head-
dress of aquatic plants, which have red tops and yellow bands
and buds over a blue nemyss with yellow knots. The collar he
wears is yellow with blue stripes as are also his wristbands and
ankle bands. His tunic is blue but has a yellow skirt wrap and
belt. In each hand he holds two green water jugs. The name of
the god-form in Coptic is Xopist tha mooou.


```
I
```
HAPIMOUN

1

```
a
```
aonrr ea Mwoa


```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
Water Pantheon (continued)
Shooen-Earth of Water, Tarot Princess of Cups. Shooen (fig.
26) is a form of Hathor, She that Nourishes. She is encased in a
blue rectangle with an orange border. Her headdress is a pair of
black bull horns with a red lunar disk between them, mounted
on a green nemyss. She has naturally colored skin, a cow's head
and a robust human body. Her skirt is blue, as is her shoulder
strap. She has blue arm bands and wristbands with a black cen-
ter stripe, and she holds a green lotus with a red top and yellow
stripe in her right hand and a green ankh in her left. The
throne she sits on is blue with orange lines. Her name in Coptic
is Sheeooee tha ist.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
Fire Pantheon
Chnupis Kneph-Spirit of Fire, Tarot Ace of Wands. Chnupis
Kneph (fig. 27) is the Molder of Men. This god-form is a
throned, ram-headed, mummified man. The throne on which he
sits is red with green lines and sits on a red base. His headdress
shows twin green plumes mounted on a green conical hat with
a red solar disk, surrounded by a band of yellow. At the base of
the hat are two green ram's horns, which are only slightly
arched upward. His nemyss is black, and his neck collar and
menat are red with thin black stripes. The shoulder collar he
wears is red, blue, yellow and red striped and has the same red-
cross band of all the Kings. The wristbands he wears are red
with yellow stripes at each end. His skin is green. In his right
hand he holds a green phoenix wand and in his left a yellow
crook and scourge. The name he has in Coptic is Knou
phooeesh.4

4. Crowley, in 777, has the Coptic names for the Fire King and the Fire
Knight transposed.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Fire Pantheon (continued)
```
Ra-Fire of Fire, Tarot KnightKing of Wands. Ra (fig. 28) is the
Sun in fullness of strength. This representation shows a hawk-
headed man striding forward. His skin is naturally colored. His
beak is green, while his eyes are red. The headdress he wears is
a red solar disk surrounded by a yellow serpent, which is
mounted on a red nemyss with green knots. The collar is green
with a red stripe on its borders, the same as his arm bands,
wristbands and ankle bands. The tunic is red with a green skirt
wrap, belt and purse. He holds a green phoenix wand in his left
hand a green ankh in his right, and he stands on a red base. His
name is Coptic is Phaouroo.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Fire Pantheon (continued)
```
Sati-Ashtoreth-Water of Fire, Tarot Queen of Wands. Sati-
Ashtoreth (fig. 29) is the Purifier and Consecrator. Here, she is
a woman seated on a red throne with green lines. She is wear-
ing a white crown from which protrude a vulture's head and tail
feathers of the same color. From this two black cow horns
emerge. Her collar, wristbands, arm bands and shoulder strap
are blue with red stripes at each end. The robe she wears is red,
and her skin is naturally colored. In her right hand she holds a
green ankh and in her left a green lotus wand with a red top. In
Coptic her name is Isthaoureth.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Fire Pantheon (continued)
```
Toum-Air of Fire, Tarot Kingprince of Wands. This figure
(fig. 30) shows a man striding forward wearing a headdress of
both the North and South. The conical part is white while the
base and back support are red, as is also a plume in the front
portion. His nemyss is red with yellow knots, while his collar,
arm bands, wristbands and ankle bands are yellow with red at
each end. The tunic and shoulder straps are red, while his skirt
wrap, belt and pouch are yellow. In his left hand is a green
phoenix wand and in his right a green ankh. The base he stands
on is red, and his skin is naturally colored. His Coptic title is
Thoooum moooou.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Fire Pantheon (continued)
```
Anouke--Earth of Fire, Tarot Princess of Wands. Anouke (fig.
31) is Mistress of the Gods, giver of power, health and joy. This
representation shows a woman seated on a red throne with
green stripes, the same as the rectangle she sits in. She wears
upon her head a green crown of feathers, in which are red and
gold feathers also. Her nemyss is gold and the band around it is
red. Her skin is naturally colored and she has blue eyes. The
collar, arm bands and wristbands are black with red stripes at
each end. Her tunic is red. She holds a green ankh in her right
hand and a green lotus wand with a red top in her left. The base
on which the throne rests is red. Her Coptic title is Ooan oo
Kist.



```
Part I-Book of Earth
```
```
Ptah
```
Spirit of Spirits, Ruler of Life and Death. This piece (fig. 32) is
only used in divination and has no strategical use except to
mark the divining square. All this will be discussed fully in Part
I11 of this book. The Ptah piece is colored white and is about half
the size of the other pieces. He is a standing form, bald and
bearded, holding in his hands a scepter and the emblems of life
and stability. His tight-fitting clothes have two holes where his
hands protrude, and a menat falls from the back of his neck.
The pedestal on which he stands is the sign of Maat.




Appendix to Part I

Table of Symbols and Associations

```
Zodiac Sign
or Element
Aries
Taurus
Gemini
Cancer
Leo
Virgo
Libra
Scorpio
Sagittarius
Capricorn
Aquarius
Pisces
Fire
Earth
Air
Water
```
```
Planet
Symbol
Mars
Venus
Mercury
Moon
Sun
Mercury
Venus
Pluto (Mars)
Jupiter
Saturn
Uranus (Saturn)
Neptune (Jupiter)
(Saturn/Mars)
(VenusIJupiter)
(Sun/Leo)
(Moon/Cancer)
```
```
Geomantic
Figure
Puer
Amissio
AZbus
Populus
Fortuna Major
Conjunctio
Puella
Rubeus
Acquisitio
Carcer
Tristitia
Laetitia
Cauda Draconis
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Minor
Via
```


Part I1

Book of Air

The Game, Its Rules

and Method of Play



Enochian Chess:

The Game

##### B

y now you understand what Enochian chess is and where it
originated. Perhaps you have made your board and
pieces-or at least you understand what they look like-
from Part I of this book. Now it is time for you to get your
thinking cap on, place a chessboard in front of you with your
four sets of pieces and have some fun with the technical aspects
of Enochian chess.
Enochian chess is a strategically intriguing game. You can
spend many enjoyable hours on game settings, piece movements,
rules of the game, recording and game strategy. It is a four-
handed game, which means that four sets of pieces and pawns
are used in game play and four players are required. The four
players pair off into two pairs, with each pair being allies. One
pair operates the passive elements (Water and Earth) and the
other pair operates the active elements (Air and Fire). However,
two people can play if each player operates a pair of allies. For
example, if you are playing with the Water Angle set, your ally is
the Earth Angle set. Your opponents will be the Air and Fire sets.


```
86 Part 11-Book of Air
```
The object of the game is to paralyze your opponents' play by
capturing their Kings. You and your ally thereby become vic-
tors. Enochian chess is played very much like ordinary chess
with the exception of a few variations in the rules, which are
tailored for four-handed play, and the starting positions of the
pieces at the beginning of the game. Although there are formal
rules given here, the question as to which player opens play is
naturally a matter of choice between players, as is the direction
of play. To explain, the order in which players make their moves
can be either of two ways: deosil (clockwise) or widdershins
(counterclockwise). These directions of movement have been
matters of controversy for many years. There have been many
variations in belief, and no doubt there will continue to be for
many years to come. Suffice it to say at this point that playing
deosil expands energy (raises consciousness) while playing wid-
dershins contracts energy, drawing it down. Neither is classed
as positive or negative; they are simply forms or a framework
within which one operates.
Following are the official rules for Enochian chess, and how
to record your games. The game strategy, opening play exam-
ples and commentaries, middle and endgame examples and
commentaries which follow have been written in such a way
that you will need an Enochian chess set in front of you if you
are to derive full understanding. The intricacies involved in the
commentaries on the game examples will be incomprehensible
unless you actually see the pieces move across the board with
the moves described.
You may find making fully colored boards and pieces a diffi-
cult task. If so, I suggest you make up a mock set, as described
earlier, as a temporary measure.


Official

Rules for

Enochian Chess

1. The chessboards and their arrangements

```
1.1 There are four boards of play, each composed of 64 flat
pyramid squares.
1.2 Each board is representative, through its pyramids of
color (see "Constructing Your Chessboards," pp. 17-31),
of one of the four elements (Earth, Air, Water and Fire)
and is called an elemental board.
1.3 Each board is divided into four Angles of 16 squares
each, with each Angle being representative of one of the
four elements, identified by its respective color. There-
fore each elemental board has one Angle of Air (upper
left-hand Angle), Water (upper right-hand Angle), Fire
(lower right-hand Angle), and Earth (lower left-hand
Angle). An Angle is referred to herein as the elemental
part of an elemental board. For example, the Airy part of
Fire = the Air Angle of the Fire Board.
```

88 Part 11-Book of Air

```
1.4 Placing the board so that you are looking towards the
top, the squares viewed horizontally are called ranks
and the squares viewed vertically are called columns.
1.5 Only one elemental chessboard is played on at a time for
any given game.
```
2. The pieces and their arrangements

```
2.1 Each player starts with five pieces and four pawns asso-
ciated with the element of the Angle being played; i.e.,
player 1 will be seated by the Earth Angle and operate
the Earth set, player 2 will be seated by the Air Angle
and operate the Air set, player 3 will be seated by the
Water Angle and operate the Water set and player 4 will
be seated by the Fire Angle and operate the Fire set.
2.2 Each set of chess pieces (pantheons) consists of a King, a
Knight, a Queen, a Bishop, a Rook and four pawns.
2.3 On each corner square is placed a King, who shares his
square with one other major piece. These corner squares
are called Throne Squares.
2.4 On each of the sequential squares beside the King is
placed one chess piece per square, the remaining three
pieces in the order of Tetragrammaton according to the
Tetragrammaton order of the element Angle of the board
chosen to be played (see pp. 101-105).
2.5 On the column or rank directly in front of the four
squares on which the pieces are placed, the pawns are
sequentially positioned according to their vice-gerents.
2.6 On the Air Angle, the Air pieces and pawns are placed
upon eight squares of the two upper ranks (i.e., two rows
of four squares each). On the Water Angle, the Water
pieces and pawns are placed upon the two right-hand
columns. On the Fire Angle, the Fire pieces and pawns
are placed on the two bottom ranks. On the Earth Angle,
```

```
Official Rules for Enochian Chess^89
```
```
the Earth pieces and pawns are placed upon the two left-
hand columns.
2.7 There are 16 opening positions for the chess pieces
from which a game can be started: four positions per
board, each derived from the order of Tetragrammaton
in each Angle. (Because the Tetragrammaton on the
Fire and Earth Boards is the same, as with the Air and
Water Boards, in actual fact there are only eight open-
ing positions.)
2.8 All four sets in each Angle must be placed according to
only one position for all, in any given game; i.e., if the
Earth of Earth setting is being used, all sets are placed
in that setting.
```
3. How the major pieces and pawns move (the term
    "piece" will refer henceforth to "piece and/or pawn")
    3.1 King-The King moves as in ordinary chess, one square
       at a time in any direction. To capture another piece, a
       King must land on the square occupied by the other
       piece and remove it from the board.
    3.2 Queen-The Queen does not move as in ordinary chess.
       The Queen moves over three squares in any direction
       (taking into account the square she is on; therefore, she
       moves two squares in any direction), horizontally, verti-
       cally or diagonally, forward or backward, always leaping
       over any piece in her path. The Queen can only capture
       a piece on the last square on which she lands in any
       move, thereby removing the captured piece.
    3.3 Knight-The Knight's move is the same as in ordinary
       chess: move one square in any direction, then forward
       one square diagonally; or one square diagonally and one
       forward; or two squares in a straight line and one across
       at a right angle. The Knight always leaps over any piece
       obstructing its progress but cannot capture it. The


```
Part II-Book of Air
```
```
Knight can only capture on the last square it lands on,
removing the captured piece from the board.
3.4 Bishop-The Bishop moves as in ordinary chess, diago-
nally only, right or left, forward or backwards, any dis-
tance in a straight line. It cannot leap over any pieces;
therefore, its move is stopped if it does not capture the
piece obstructing its move. When the Bishop captures
any piece, it lands on the square occupied by that piece,
takes the captured piece off the board and remains on
that square until moved again.
3.5 Rook (Castle)-The Rook moves as in ordinary chess,
horizontally or vertically, forward or backward, in a
straight line. The Rook can capture a piece on any
square it moves to in a straight line, remaining on that
square until its next turn. The Rook cannot leap over
any obstructing piece in its way but has its move
restricted unless it captures the obstructing piece. The
Rook does not move diagonally.
3.6 Pawns-A pawn moves only one square at a time for-
ward (not two squares on the first move as permitted in
ordinary chess). The regular method of capturing
another piece by moving one square diagonally, left or
right, in the forward direction, is still used. Pawns do
not move backward or at right angles to their direction
of play as indicated from their opening positions.
```
4. The conduct of the game

```
4.1 Although the game is designed for four players, each oper-
ating one set of pieces, two players can play by utilizing
each a pair of allies. The Actives (Air and Fire) are allies
and the Passives (Water and Earth) are allies. If two peo-
ple are playing, each player will operate one pair of allies.
(a) A player operating two sets of pieces cannot choose to
move a piece from either set. When each Angle's turn
```

```
Official Rules for Enochian Chess 91
```
```
comes around, a piece from the set for that specific
Angle can be moved. An exception to this is rule 9.1.
```
```
4.2 The players must decide before the game is started as to
what direction they will play, either widdershins or
deosil. The original Golden Dawn version utilized the
deosil direction of play, but experimentation with both
directions shows that it can be played either way. How-
ever, the direction of play cannot be changed in the mid-
dle of a game.
4.3 The Angle for each player at the commencement of the
game is decided by the throw of dice. The one who
throws the highest number chooses the Angle he or she
wishes to play. The players throwing the second and
third highest numbers then choose their Angles, leaving
the fourth player with the remaining Angle. If there are
only two players, the throw of dice decides who plays the
Passives and who plays the Actives: the highest number
plays the Actives.
4.4 The player operating the pieces of the greater Angle
commences the game. (The greater Angle is that of the
element of the board being used; e.g., Fire Angle of Fire
Board, Water Angle of Water Board, etc.)
4.5 At each player's turn to move, he or she must move one
piece only, then wait for his or her next turn to again
move one piece.
```
5. The definition of the move

```
5.1 A move is the transfer of a piece from one square to
another which is either vacant or occupied by an enemy
piece.
5.2 One cannot move to any square occupied by an allied
piece or by one of his or her own pieces. (Rule 11.3 is an
exception to this.)
```

92 Part 11-Book of Air

```
5.3 No piece except the Knight and Queen may cross a
square occupied by another piece.
5.4 A piece entering a square occupied by an enemy piece
captures it as part of the same move, and the move ends
at that point. The captured piece must be immediately
removed from the chessboard by the player making the
capture.
5.5 There is no castling.
5.6 There is no en passant.
5.7 A move is completed when a player's hand is removed
from the piece being moved.
5.8 The touched piece:
(a) Provided a player warns the other players, he or she
may adjust one or more pieces on their squares.
However, the pieces must. not be moved from any
square to any other square until it is the player's
turn.
(b) If a player, on his or her turn, touches one or more
pieces, he or she must move or capture the first piece
touched that can be moved or captured.
(c) If the move or capture is :not possible after a piece
has been touched, the player is free to make any
legal move he or she chooses.
(d) If a player wishes to claim a violation of this rule, he
or she must do so before touching any piece on the
board.
5.9 When each player has moved once, it is considered a Set
of Moves, or round of play.
5.10 Concourse of Bishoping: Enemy Bishops move on differ-
ent courses; therefore, Bishops cannot capture enemy
Bishops. Allied Bishops move on the same course. If
```

```
Official Rules for Enochian Chess 93
```
```
three Bishops are on adjacent squares and the fourth
Bishop moves into position to occupy the fourth square,
this player completes the concourse of Bishoping, cap-
tures the two enemy Bishops and takes control of the
moves of the ally Bishop. There are only five positions on
the board where a concourse can occur:
```
```
5.11 Concourse of Queens: Rule 5.10 also applies when three
Queens are on adjacent squares and the fourth Queen
moves into position to occupy the fourth square.
```
6. Object of the game

```
6.1 To work as a team with your ally to capture the oppo-
nents' Kings, paralyzing their play. This is done through
strategical play, encountering the opponents' forces, cap-
turing them if you are able, but at the same time defend-
ing your own King and taking your ally's welfare into
consideration.
```

94 Part 11-Book of Air

7. Throne Square

```
7.1 Throne Squares are the corner squares where each of
the four Kings resides at the beginning of play.
7.2 A King shares its Throne Square with a piece (Knight,
Queen, Bishop or Rook) in the opening game setting. No
other piece can mount that square while the King or
sharing piece occupy it except in the event of capturing
the King.
7.3 Once either the King or piece sharing the Throne Square
moves from that square, during game play, neither can
share that square or any other square for the duration of
the game.
7.4 The King and the piece sharing the Throne Square do
not move off the Throne Square together. Either piece
can be moved, one at a time in separate moves, when it
is that player's turn to move. For example, if a King is
in check, only the piece or the King could be moved,
not both.
7.5 No two pieces can share the si2me square except the two
pieces on the Throne Square, and then only until one
moves off.
7.6 A piece giving check to a King seated on its Throne
Square also gives check to the piece seated with the King
on the same square. When the King is captured, so is the
piece sharing the square at the time (and vice versa).
7.7 If a player mounts his or her own King on the Throne of
his or her ally, he or she assumes command of the allied
forces together with his or her own and is free to move
any piece that was under the ally's command during that
Angle's sequential moves. This situation continues for
the duration of play or until rille 8.9 operates.
```

```
Official Rules for Enochian Chess
```
8. The King: capturing and checking, endgame

```
8.1 A King is said to be in check when an opponent's next
move is able to capture that King. The opponent must
say "check" to warn the player threatened.
(a) A King, when checked, if it cannot be freed from
check, is captured on the following turn. The remain-
ing pieces of that captured King are frozen (see 8.2).
(b) A player is obliged to move his or her Kzng when the
King is attacked or checked. If the King is unable to
move, then a piece must be strategically moved to aid
the King.
8.2 When a King is captured (not "checkmated) by an oppo-
nent, he is taken off the board, but the King's pieces are
leR in the positions in which they are situated at the time
of the King's capture. No one can move these pieces, and
they are called Frozen Pieces. They must remain on those
same squares for the duration of play (or until rule 8.5 is
invoked), neither moving nor being attacked, and only
blocking the squares they occupy; no other piece can move
onto the squares occupied by the Frozen Pieces. Merely to
check a King does not capture and freeze a player's pieces.
The King must be captured and removed from the board.
After a King has been checked, the King or the ally of the
threatened King may be able to make a strategical move
to prevent capture. For example, if the ally's next move is
to threaten to capture an Angle by threatening a King or
major piece, it would buy time for another round of play
and give the initially threatened King time to move com-
pletely out of check, perhaps by using rule 8.6.
8.3 The remaining Ally continues to play and seeks to
release the captured King by an exchange, as defined in
rule 8.5.
8.4 The player whose King is captured by an opponent loses
his turn to move, and no other player may take that turn.
```

96 Part II-Book of Air

```
8.5 Regaining the Throne: If an ally's King has been cap-
tured by an opponent and a hostile King is then cap-
tured, the player making the second capture may
propose an exchange of prisoner Kings. The opposing
player has the option of accepting or refusing.
(a) The exchange cannot take place if the opponent was
not the one that captured the ally's King.
(b) A rescued King re-enters the board on his own
Throne Square, or if that square is occupied, on the
nearest square to the Throne Square that is not occu-
pied and that is not threatened by any other piece.
(c) The player who has been out of the game immedi-
ately regains control of his or her previously frozen
pieces when his or her King is restored.
(d) This offer of exchange can be made when the hostile
King is captured or thereafter when it is the move of
the player making the capture. If refused, the offer
can be made more than once.
(e) Players with frozen pieces cannot negotiate King
exchanges.
8.6 Checking: A King can move into check if already in
check by another piece. The move might enable the ally
or one of the King's own pieces to free the situation.
8.7 If an ally's pieces are frozen and a player manages to
capture both opponents' Kings, or the ally has captured
one of the opponents' Kings before being frozen and the
player captures the other, that player is the victor. If a
player and his or her ally capture both opponent Kings,
then they are both the victors.
8.8 Allies do not continue to play against each other when a
victory over both opponents has been established.
8.9 If an ally's pieces are under a player's control (according
to Rule 7.7 or 11.3) and that player's King is captured,
```

```
Official Rules for Enochian Chess 97
```
```
the ally's pieces are then immediately released back to
the control of their original player. The pieces of the cap-
tured King become frozen (Rule 8.2). If a player gained
control of his or her ally's forces via Rule 11.3, then the
ally's King regains his throne via Rule 8.5(b).
```
8.10 A drawn game is:

```
(a) When only Kings are left to play, all other pieces and
pawns having been captured; i.e., four bare Kings
(see Rule 8.14[b]). (A King is bare when all his pieces
and pawns have been captured.)
(b) Two ally Kings are bare.
```
8.11 Stalemate: If a King cannot move to any square from an
unchecked square without moving into check, the game
is classed as a stalemate for that element and no move
can be made by that element until his stalemate is freed
by an ally. If the ally is out of the game (withdrawn or
pieces under control of the partner) the game is drawn.

8.12 When a player has lost all of his or her pieces (including
his or her King) and pawns, that player is out of the game.
me turn of that player does not pass to the partner, who
must continue to play with only one turn per round.

8.13 If the player is left to face two opponents with one set of
pieces and the position seems hopeless, that player may
resign, leaving the victory to the opponents.

8.14 The game terminates when:

```
(a) One side (both allies) captures both opposing Kings.
This is a win (Rule 8.7).
(b) Drawn game (Rule 8.10).
(c) A drawn (Rule 8.11), resigned or stalemate game.
(dl In the case of an annulment according to Rules 12.2
and 12.3.
```

98 Part 11-Book of Air

9. Withdrawing

```
9.1 If a player loses all pieces except the King, that player
may withdraw from the game. In so doing that player
may be leaving the ally to play alone, and in this case the
remaining player takes the withdrawn player's turn as
well as his or her own when moving his or her own pieces.
(a) The withdrawn player's King remains on the board
and the remaining player takes control of it on the
turn of that King's Angle.
(b) This rule does not apply if only two players are oper-
ating the four Angles (two ally sets each).
9.2 Any player can withdraw from. a game at any time, other
than described in rule 9.1, but in so doing that player
forfeits control of his or her pieces and leaves them
under the ally's control. The playing turn, however, is
not shared with the remaining player's pieces as in Rule
9.1 but is continued as before, one turn per corner in
each round of play.
(a) This rule does not apply if only two players are oper-
ating four Angles (two ally sets each).
9.3 In the case of two players operating two ally sets each, if
a player loses all the pieces except the King of one of the
sets he or she is operating, he or she may choose to play
on with that King or withdraw that Angle from the game.
In that case, the King of that Angle remains where it is
as a frozen piece and the turns of the withdrawn Angle
are relinquished; the player of'the remaining Angle does
not have use of'the withdrawn Angle's moves. Therefore
the remaining Angle must continue play with one turn
per round of play as opposed to the opponents' two turns.
```
10. Pawns

```
10.1 If a pawn reaches an unoccupied or uncovered square on
the opposite side of the board from that in which it faced
```

```
Official Rules for Enochian Chess 99
```
```
at the commencement of the it is promoted to the
piece to which it is vice-gerent.
(a) Promotion only occurs if the player has already lost
one or more pawns.
(b) If a player still controls four pawns, promotion is
delayed until a pawn is lost.
10.2 A pawn reaching a Throne Square is not promoted to a
King; it can only be promoted to the piece originally
sharing the Throne Square.
10.3 Privileged pawn: If a player has only a King, Bishop or
Queen, and a pawn left (or a King and a pawn), then this
pawn becomes a privileged pawn and, on reaching any
square on the opposite side of the board, can be pro-
moted to any piece (not including a King) at the choice of
the player, even if that piece is already on the board. In
this case a pawn is returned to the board and takes the
role of the piece that is duplicated.
10.4 If a pawn at any time in the game comes to a different
side other than the opposite side of the board from which
it originally faced, that pawn must continue to move on
its original forward course (as in ordinary chess).
10.5 A King does not have a pawn. The pawn in front of the
King belongs to the piece sharing the Throne Square at
the beginning of play. This pawn is already on a "side" of
the board, as mentioned in Rule 10.4.
```
11. Allies

```
11.1 Only Fire and Air or Water and Earth are allies. The
allies are diagonal to each other. Under no circum-
stances can Fire and Water, Fire and Earth etc. be allies.
(One plays for him or herself but is always aware of the
ally strategy. He or she should not hinder his or her
ally's play but should strive to complement it. The allies
can work together to achieve victory.)
```

100 Part II-Book of Air

```
11.2 A player does not capture his or her ally's pieces (Rule
5.2 prevents this) or check his or her ally's King (with
the exception of Rule 11.3).
11.3 If a King is about to be taken, that player's ally may cap-
ture the King and gain control of both elemental sides.
Each element must move in turn and not share moves.
In this case the captured King is removed but his pieces
and pawns are not frozen. This rule does not apply when
only two players are playing instead of four.
11.4 Assuming command of ally forces. See Rule 7.7
```
12. Illegal moves (any move contrary to the above rules)
    12.1 If an illegal move is made, the positions of all pieces
       prior to the move are reinstated and the game is contin-
       ued from that point on.
    12.2 If several illegal moves are made, the game is annulled.
    12.3 If during the game the opening positions of the pieces are
       found to be incorrect in any Angle, the game is annulled.
See Part I11 of this book for Rules 13 to 19, which are div-
ination rules.


Setting Up

Your Boards:

Game Play

Settings

Positioning of the Chess Pieces

##### T

he chessmen of the Enochian chess game are positioned
around the edge of a board in the form of an ancient swasti-
ka (fylfot). This form of positioning is found in the game of
Chaturanga and also coincides with a diagram of the swasti-
ka as found in the original Golden Dawn cipher manuscripts.
This was originally simply a blank cross, but it was later filled in
by Mathers for the 1=10 grade ritual of Zelator in the Order.
There are two swastika symbols found in ancient civiliza-
tion~:~ clockwise and counterclockwise in movement. The actu-
al origin of the Hindu word "swastika" means "movement of
life," with a positive emphasis. The Celtic swastika indicates

1. See An Illustrated Encyclopzdia of Traditional Symbols by J. C. Cooper
(Thames Hudson, 1979) for an in-depth look at this symbol.


102 Part II-Book of Air

good luck, while the the Roman one is a symbol of Jupiter.
The positive swastika, which is the way the chess pieces are
placed on a board at the commencement of a game, shows a nat-
ural development coupled with celestial harmony authorized by
divine power, all of which can be correlated with game play.
In ancient times different colored swastikas had different
meanings in much the same way as colors are associated with
various planets of our solar system. The multicolored chess
pieces herein described show a combined harmony of color and
perfect balance of the cycle of movement, a beautiful composite
of the Yinl Yang aspect. A modern approach to placing the pieces
shows an archetype in various stages of development, and the
Enochian chess game should be played with this in mind.

```
FIGURE 33-SWASTIKA PLACINGS OF THE AIR OF FIRE SETTING
```

```
Setting Up Your Boards 103
```
Theoretically there are 16 different play positions in which
the chess pieces could be placed at the commencement of a
game. Each piece falls in line with a Tarot court card, geoman-
tic figure, etc. A closer look, however, will show that, if the chess
positions are based on the Kerubic Square associations of the
Enochian Tablets, there are only eight different settings. The
reason for this is that the Air and Water Tablets have the same
order of Tetragrammaton applied to these squares, as likewise
do the Earth and Fire Tablets.
In the diagram below, a chessboard is shown. Squares have
been numbered showing the positions in which the chess pieces
are to be placed. Following the diagram is a list of the different
play positions for each chessboard. A number beside each chess
piece, cross-referenced with the diagram, indicates the square
where the piece will be placed.

```
Air Water
```
```
Earth Fire
```
```
FIGURE PIECE POSITIONING FOR OPENING PLAY SETTINGS
```

```
104 Part II-Book of Air
```
In the following combinations of piece positioning, any com-
bination, when chosen for game play, would be repeated in each
Angle of the board being used. You do not place a different com-
bination in each corner. The pawns for each elemental set of
pieces are placed in front of the appropriate pieces to which
they are vice-gerent (as given in Part I).

```
Fire and Earth Chessboards
```
Earth combination-otherwise known as the Earth of Earth
setting if played on the Earth Board, or the Earth of Fire set-
ting if played on the Fire Board.
Square
King and Rook 1
Bishop 2
Queen 3
Knight 4

Air combination-Air of Earth or Air of Fire

```
King and Bishop
Rook
Knight
Queen
```
Water combination-water of Earth or Water of Fire

```
King and Queen
Knight
Rook
Bishop
```
```
Fire combination-Fire of Earth or Fire of Fire
King and Knight
Queen
Bishop
Rook
```

```
Setting Up Your Boards
```
```
Air and Water Chessboards
```
Earth combination-otherwise known as the Earth of Air set-
ting if played on the Air Board, or the Earth of Water setting if
played on the Water Board.
Square
King and Rook 1
Knight 2
Queen 3
Bishop 4

Air combination-Air of Air or Air of Water

```
King and Bishop 1
Queen 2
Knight 3
Rook 4
```
```
Water combination-Water of Air or Water of Water
King and Queen
Bishop
Rook
Knight
```
```
Fire combination-Fire of Air or Fire of Water
King and Knight
Rook
Bishop
Queen
```

106 Part 11-Book of Air

Which Board to Use?

The particular elemental board used will be relevant to the set-
ting that is chosen for any given game with respect to game
strategy only. However, for those who only have one board con-
structed (preferably the Earth Board), the question of which
board to use will be irrelevant. Do not, however, look lightly on
the value of having four elemental chessboards. Their impor-
tance, meanings and use are varied when using them for div-
ination or magic. In these cases, it is the board that is first
chosen for a game; only then is the choice made among the four
settings applicable to the given board.
If you possess the four elemental chessboards, whether you
play Enochian chess strategically, for divinatory purposes or
otherwise, you should only play any given setting on its associ-
ated elemental board. For example, the Fire of Earth setting is
played on the Earth Board, the Water of Air setting is played on
the Air Board, the Air of Fire setting on the Fire Board, the Fire
of Water setting on the Water Board and so on.
Further information on the meanings and use of the four
elemental chessboards is given in Parts I11 and IV, since this
information is relevant to the subjects therein.


Recording

Game Play

```
'thin the original Golden Dawn system, one of the things
that became a stumbling block for Enochian chess was that
there was no method of recording game play. The method
```
### W below is one that I worked out in 1980 when preparing the

first draft of this book. Since then I have seen no need to improve
upon it: and I personally find it more than satisfactory.
In recording your game, the letter of the piece, the Angle it
moves to, the square number and letter and any other function
must be written down. For example, K is the letter used for King,
1 = square one and a = square letter, so at the commencement of
the game the King actually sits on la, and this may be written
Kla. The abbreviations used are as follows.

```
F = Fire W = Water A = Air
E = Earth P = Pawn K = King
```

108 Part 11-Book of Air

```
Q = Queen B = Bishop N = Knight
R = Rook (Castle)
x = Captured piece; e.g., NWldxP (Knight moved to Water
square Id and captured a pawn)
+ = Check ++ = Captured King
* = Bad move
? = Questionable move
# = Promoted pawn
```
When recording your moves, it is easiest to record only the
square that a piece moves to rather than first writing in the
square it came from; that square was made clear in moves pre-
viously recorded. It is also not necessary to establish what ele-
mental piece has been moved (e.g., FN3d, Fire Knight to 3d),
because each elemental Angle's move is recorded under its spe-
cific column (see diagram of play recording sheet). Therefore,
move recording might look like this:

```
6 ... NW3d R4a Qlc BF2dxN
7 NE4d RFld P2dxB P~c?
8 NA2d. RF2dxP Q3c K2b
9 QW3d ...
```
In move 6, the Air Knight moved to Water 3d and Water's Rook
moved to 4a in the Water Angle. Since it is a Water piece, there
was no need to record the Angle in which it was moving (i.e., its
own). The Fire Queen moved to lc, and Earth's Bishop captured
a Knight on Fire Angle square 2d. In move 7, Air's Knight pro-
ceeded to move to Earth Angle square 4d. Looking back to move
6 you will see which square and Angle the Knight was moving
from. Water's Rook moved from its own Angle to the Fire Angle,
square Id; Fire's pawn took a Bishop on square 2d of the Fire


```
Recording Game Play 109
```
Angle; an Earth pawn moved to 2c, which was considered a
questionable move; and so on.
Below is a diagram of the recording codes set up on a chess-
board. It is followed by two diagrams of a suggested format for
a play-recording sheet.

```
Air 1 234dc b a Water
```
```
Earth a b c d 4 3 2 1 Fire
```

110 Part 11-Book of Air

```
FIGURE 36~-FORMAT FOR A GAME RECORDING SHEET
```
```
Enochian Chess Game Recording Sheet
Date: Board:
Piece Selling:
```
Where "Player 1, 2, 3 and 4" have been written in, the ele-
ment each player operates is written above. A space could be
left under the date for the names of the players. For a divina-
tion game the following sheet could be drawn up.

```
FIGURE 36~-FORMAT FOR A DIVINATION GAME
RECORDING SHEET
```
```
Move Player^2 Player 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 L
```
```
Enochian Chess Game Recording Sheet
Date: Board:
Question: Piece Setting:
Ptah Square:
```
These sheets have proven very helpful when recording
games, since the moves for each set of pieces are kept clearly

```
Player 1 Player^4
```
```
Move Player^2 Player^3 Player^4
1 2 3 4 5 6
```
```
Player 1
```

```
Recording Game Play 111
```
separate from the other sets. It is normally satisfactory to pro-
vide for 20 to 30 moves, but to be on the safe side I use sheets
with space to record as many as 40 moves.



Game

Strategy

##### T

he challenge of eight different game settings, each providing
a mass of variations in game play, can be quite exciting. I
have provided in the following chapters some recorded
games together with their analyses. I have attempted there-
by to open up the world of Enochian chess to you, the reader, dis-
cussing opening moves of the eight settings1 and middlelendgame
play. These discussions address some of the weaknesses and
strengths of play. When studying these eight settings, you may
find that the most effective method by which you open your play
can be analogous to the elemental character of the setting itself.
Enochian chess can be approached strategically from a two-
handed chess (modern chess) point of view; e.g., the use of com-
binations, traps, double attacks, pins, forks et~. However, in a
four-handed chess game, you must learn to work with an ally

1. See previous chapter on Game Play Settings (p. 101).

```
113
```

```
114 Part 11-Book of Air
```
and be aware of the strengths of your pieces in each play set-
ting. Develop your ininor pieces and your defense to decrease
your risk of losing valuable pieces. One common error is to
exchange two pieces for a Rook, which leaves you with fewer
pieces to maneuver. In all game settings, there is at least one
piece that is the weakest-but it is not always the same piece.
For example, the Queen's move is very limited and is suited to a
more defensive, sacrificial role, but there are some play settings
where the Queen's presence is quite strong.
Piece strength and value vary throughout the game and also
continue to be dependent on the play setting you are working
with at the time. For example, in one setting, a Knight may be
very weak at opening play, but during middle-game play his
value increases. Because of this, it is advisablle not to make
early sacrifices. Study your play settings, for they hold the keys.
Endgame play can be viewed a little differently, for here the
Rooks hold the strength, and depending on what pieces your
opponent has left in play, the Knight and Bishop hold equal
footing, the Knight perhaps a little more.
Double attacks take place where one piece is covered by
more than one attacking piece. This can cost you[. Try to back up
all your pieces and position them so that they cover each other.
An undefended piece or pawn, even if not threatened, is ulti-
mately vulnerable. There are also times where you must lose a
piece to save your King, so try to get the Throne Square cleared
of the piece sharing it or move the King if strategy dictates.
Organize your thinking; you are not lookirlg ahead two to
five moves as in ordlcnary chess. To look even one move ahead in
Enochian chess, you have to take into considerzltion four differ-
ent play positions and their possibilities. To look four moves
ahead, you must coilsider 16 different play positions and their
variations or probabilities.
Do not forget your pawns. A strategically placed pawn can
severely hinder your opponents' play. Be carefull of traps. Think
twice if your opponent makes a seemingly non-offensive or fool-
ish move; it could be bait. Try not to give check to an opponent
if your checking piece cannot be backed up with a strong move


```
Game Strategy 115
```
by your own pieces or your ally's. So often I have seen players
become extremely disadvantaged by premature checks.
As in ordinary chess, control over the center of the board is
advantageous, but not easy. By keeping your pawns linked and
eventually linking up with your ally's pawns, you can create a
dividing line across the board. Double pawns or loose pawns are
weak and become a liability; once they arise, they are difficult
to alter.
Unlike ordinary chess, a player does not always have full
control over his or her play, because chain reactions caused by
forced moves often occur. This can lead a skilled player into dif-
ficulty, giving a less skilled player the upper hand. Therefore,
you will find that even the best of players can be foiled if he or
she is not extra careful. Enochian chess is not only a challenge
to your intellect and concentration, but to many other hidden
facets of your nature, which will be further discussed in Parts
I11 and IV of this book.
Pins are frequent in Enochian chess. A pin involves three
essential pieces: the pinning piece, the pinned piece and the tar-
get. A pinned piece cannot move without exposing an essential
piece; e.g., a piece on the square in front of a King. Cross pins
are even more vicious than pins; this is where the pinned piece
is held from more than one direction or protects more than one
piece. To defend yourself against a pin, you can either place a
defender between the pinned piece and the target, lend addi-
tional protection to the pinned piece without unpinning, move
the target or attack the pinning piece.
You will find that in all play settings the Bishops and
Queens of the same element and of the ally element operate on
different diagonals from each other. For example, in each ele-
ment set of pieces, there is one Bishop and one Queen, and each
operates on a different diagonal; therefore, they can never cross
the same square. A Bishop moves along the same diagonal as
its ally Bishop, but neither can capture an opponent Bishop
because the opponent Bishops operate a different diagonal. Your
Bishop can capture an opponent's Queen, since they operate on
the same diagonal. Ally Queens move along the same diagonal,


```
116 Part 11-Book of Air
```
but neither can capture an opponent Queen because they oper-
ate on the diagonal upon which their opponents7 Bishops move,
but because of this your Queen can capture opponent Bishops.
The diagonals that Bishops or Queens operate on are dependent
on the type of play setting used at the commencement of the
game. The only time you have an opportunity to operate a Bish-
op on your Queen's diagonal is when your Bishop's pawn reach-
es the opposite side of the board, where an exchange occurs.
The movement of these pieces across an Enochian chess-
board is discussed in a paper by Mathers called "Notes on Rosi-
crucian Chess" under the preceding subtitle "The Awakening of
the Abodes." This paper appears to have little strategical value
apart from an observation of piece movement. Enochian chess
divination and esoteric instruction have more use for this
paper; however, extracts have been quoted below.2 While read-
ing these extracts, the reader is advised to refer back to the ear-
lier diagrams showing the attributions of the chessboards, or to
refer forward to the divinations section of this book, to the dia-
grams of the Zodiac on the boards.

```
The diagonal lines of Bishop's move present peculiarities.
Every Lesser Angle throughout the tablets has al diagonal line
of four squares starting from its prime square; which are allot-
ted respectively to Aries, Gemini, Scorpio and E)arth (the non
Osiris Squares). From these four squares the Bishops can
move one square into a square of Libra, Sagittarius, Taurus or
Water, these completing the series of squares in that Lesser
Angle in which a Bishop can move. Let us call this the Aries
system of diagonal squares. This diagonal is crossed by anoth-
er which in the Airy and Watery Boards is composed of Can-
```
2. I personally disagree with some of the comments made in this paper and
have therefore only quoted a few extracts. Judging by the style, it appears that
Mathers worked a lot on theory. How much practice he had is anyone's guess.
In addition, the reference to black and white squares is not really applicable,
because the Enochian chessboards are not black and white. This shows that
the game was possibly originally considered using a plain black and white
board. Mathers states th.at the signs of the Zodiac are naturally allied. I do not
agree, because the signs he discusses are in fact in opposition to each other.


```
Game Strategy
```
```
cer, Leo, Virgo and Air Squares, having as subsidiaries,
squares of Aquarius, Pisces, Capricorn and Fire. In the Earthy
and Fiery Board the second series of four form the diagonal
and the first subsidiaries. Let us call this the Cancer series.
If we now examine the Boards we shall see that the Aries
system of any Lesser angle is joined diagonally to the Aries
systems of other Lesser Angles; and that the Cancer is also
similarly joined to other Cancer systems. So that we have two
systems of squares; the Aries and Cancer; of the whole, each
containing four squares allotted to every sign it contains. This
resembles the black and white systems of squares of the ordi-
nary boards; and it is as if we allotted the White to Aries and
the Black to Cancer.... The central squares of the Board con-
tain 16 signs that are allotted to each lesser Angle. And it is
only on these 16 squares that the pieces-except the Rook and
the King-develop their full influence or defensive force.
The four Queens, the Watery portion of their respective
Elements govern between them every Square of every board.
But a Queen can never check another Queen for the following
reasons. Each of these pieces govern 16 squares on the board,
four in each Lesser Angle: and they are so placed as to divide
the 64 squares equally between them. It follows, therefore, that
there is only one of them that can check the ptah3 square. The
16 squares governed by any Queen are allotted to eight signs,
two squares of each sign to every Queen. And the remaining
two squares of the same eight signs are governed by the friend-
ly Queen. And the other pair of Queens govern the 32 other
squares similarly. The Queen of the Prime Player always gov-
erns the Water, Earth, Taurus and Scorpio squares of its own
lesser angle, and also of the Lesser Angle of the same rank. In
each of the two Lesser Angles, the Queen of the Prime Player
governs the Sagittarius, Gemini, Libra and Aries squares.4 The
```
3. The Ptah is the stationary piece used in the divination game. See Part I11 of
this book for further information.
4. This would only be the case with certain piece settings such as Fire of
Earth, Water of Water, Water of Earth, Fire of Air, Air of Air, Fire of Fire,
Earth of Water and Earth of Earth. Otherwise, the Prime Player and Ally
Queens would govern the Cancer System with the Opposing Queens govern-
ing the Aries System.


118 Part 11-Book of Air

```
allied Queen governs the same squares in the opposite ranks
of the Lesser Angles. Thus the Prime player's Queen and his
ally together govern the Aries system of squares, and this is
equally true of every board. The opposing Queens govern the
squares of the Cancer system, against a passive prime player.
The opposing Queens govern the squares of the Cancer
system in a similar manner. But there is a slight variation
dependent on the position of the Prime Player. They together
govern the Cancer system. If water or earth be the Prime
Player, the opposing Queens govern the Air, Fire, Leo and
Aquarius squares in their own Lesser Angles ancl in the others
of the same rank; while in the other rank they govern Virgo,
Pisces, Cancer and Capricorn squares. If Air or Fire be the
Prime Player these two sets of squares are reversed. The
Queen of the Prinie Player, and, therefore of the attacked
Lesser Angle, invariably governs therein the passive Kerubic
and Elemental squares. The attacking Queens govern and
have their bases, when active Elements attack-the active
Kerubic and Elemental squares. When passive elements
attack-the passive Cardinal and Common Sign Squares. The
allied Queen, supporting the defence, has for her base the
squares corresporkding to those of the Prime Player, the pas-
sive Kerubic and Elemental squares. It also falls out that no
passive Queen can, under any circumstances of Board or set-
ting, check an active Kerubic, Cardinal, Common or Elemen-
tal square in her own rank of Lesser Angles, nor a similar
passive square in the other rank.
It is to be seem that there are certain Signs whereon the
Queens are strong and others whereon they are weak. In
defence, the Queens, or Watery Forces of each element, are
strong in the Water, Earth, Scorpio and Taurus squares of the
irrespective domains. But in attacking, the vulnerable points
of the hostile depends upon which elements are in operation.
If Water be the Prime Player, and hence the paint of attack,
the Watery Queen can deliver a strong counter attack on
Water, Earth, Scorpio and Taurus of Yellow-Air (being in the
same rank), and on Aries, Gemini, Sagittarius and Libra of
Red-Fire. While th~e friendly Water of Earth delivers attack on
Aries, Gemini, Sagittarius and Libra of Yellow-Air, and water,
```

```
Game Strategy
```
Earth, Scorpio and Taurus of Red-Fire. The Aries system then
offers the strong points for the Airy portion of an Elemental
Force in defence; and the Cancer system in offense.
The Watery forces of the elements never oppose one
another, nor clash in their action. Each undulates onwards
unaffected by and unaffecting undulations of the others. Each
Queen will swamp an opposing force only when that force
encroaches on the domain of the particular Queen. Every
Queen has to fear the attack of the opposing Airy forces. But
as the latter develop force as the matter proceeds towards ulti-
mation, the Queen when protected is not likely to be destroyed
by an opposing and threatening Bishop. The same is true as
regards the hostile Knight's attack. This rule of play is gener-
ally sound except in the case of a Queen that can check the
Ptah Square, which ability greatly enhances her value.
The Bishops of partners always govern the same set of
squares; and the Bishop of the opposing sides govern opposite
sets of squares. These sets are the same of those before men-
tioned as the Aries and Cancer systems. The Bishops of the
Prime Player and his ally always govern the Cancer system;
and those of the opponent always act on the Aries system.
Hence if the Ptah square be of the Aries system, the airy parts
of the opposing forces have great power; but if it be of the Can-
cer system the opposing aerial forces are impotent in direct
attack and can only be operative secondarily. It follows, too,
that the Bishops and the Queens are great opponents, since
the Bishops operate over the same system as their opposing
Queens. The Queens can only touch 16 squares while the
Bishop can touch 32, giving the latter a greater superiority in
this respect. But the Queen must be considered the equal of
the Bishop from the power she possesses to hop over an inter-
vening piece, which would arrest the approach of the Bishop.
And further, the Watery piece is not hampered by the pawns
in the opening, whereas the Bishop as a rule cannot act at all
until one pawn has been moved.'
The Knights can all reach every square on the Boards, and
therefore, operate over both the Aries and Cancer Systems.
The Knight moves from one of these Systems into the other
every time he is played. If he starts on a square of the Aries,


```
Part II-Book of Air
```
```
the first, third, and fifth, etc., moves will bring him on to
squares of the Cancer System. And in his first, third or fifth
moves he can get to any Cancer System square on the board.
His second, fourth and sixth moves will equally bring him to
any Aries System square. There appears to be orlly one square
on the board that requires six moves to reach. 'That is, if the
Knight be in one of the corner squares he cannot cross the
board diagonally into the opposite corner in less than six
moves.
The Knight when placed in the corner square can only
move to 2 others. 'The Knight when placed in the two adjacent
squares can only move to 3 others. The Knight when placed in
any other outside square can only move to LC others. The
Knight when placed in any other second row square can only
move to 6 others. But in the central 16 its full power is devel-
oped and it can move to eight others. This gives the possible
moves of a Knight as 336. There is a curious difference
between the details of these 336 moves in the upper and lower
Ranks of Tablets. The Air Board will be identical with the
Watery. The Earthy Board will be identical with the Fiery.
```
Mathers goes on. to say that the squares of certain signs are
more often attacked. by the Knight than others, for instance:

... the four Sagitt.arius squares in the Air and Watery Boards
are attackable from no less than 24 squares, where the four
Taurus squares are attackable from 18 squares. When playing
the 16 central squares, each Knight governs 8 squares. These
8 squares, however, are not promiscuously arranged, but fol-
low one rule in the Air and Watery boards, and another in the
Earth and Fire.
In the former the 8 squares are allotted to 6 signs, two of
which are moved to twice. Thus from the Earth square of the
Water Tablet, the Knight moves to the following squares: Virgo,
Leo, Capricorn 2, Cancer 2, Pisces, Aquarius, duplicating Capri-
corn and Cancer, and missing Fire and Air of the Cancer sys-
tem. Or again from the Aries square, the Knight moves to
Pisces, Aquarius, Air 2, Capricorn 2, Virgo and Leo, duplicating
Air and Capricorn, and the missing Fire and Cancer....


```
Game Strategy 121
```
From the central 16 squares an attack is made on the Car-
dinal and Common Signs 10 times each; but on the Kerubic
and Elemental Squares 6 times each. This is true of every
board, and the reason is to be found in the position of the
ranks; which in every case are disposed so that the uppermost
and lowermost ranks are Kerubic and Elemental, while the
two central ranks are Cardinal and Common. The same rea-
son will explain the peculiarities of the curious differences
between the columns-the number of times the Sign is dupli-
cated, triplicated and missed.
This analysis of the moves from the 16 central squares
seems to show a certain steadiness in the Earth and Fire
Tablets, and is less seen in the Water and Air.

```
The same increase of steadiness is described here:
```
In Air and Water the extreme numbers are 24 and 18. In
Earth and Fire the extreme numbers are 23 and 19. The
moves of the Knight referred in a similar way to the remain-
ing 48 squares show the same point, a great steadiness in the
Earth and Fire boards than in the Water and Air. And this dif-
ference is seen in the outer row and not in the inner one. The
28 outside squares are attacked by 96 possible moves. The 20
next squares are attacked by 112 possible moves. The 16 cen-
tral squares are attacked by 128 possible moves.
The Rook moves through columns as through ranks. She
is able, therefore, to reach every square on the board, and is
very powerful. But her movement is very ponderous, and it is
a piece that is not moved many times in a game unless the
forces of the other Elements have been absorbed in its working
out. While the Aleph, Mem, and Shin forces are in full opera-
tion the Rook is easily attacked and with difficulty defended,
unless she remain quiet, and act as a firm basis of support and
defence to the side. If she however, make the mistake of enter-
ing early into action she is nearly sure to fall a prey to the
more subtle forces whose proper sphere is attack.
If the more subtle forces do not bring about a solution of
the question, and the matter has to be fought out to the bitter
end, that is, if the Yetziratic and Briatic forces are absorbed


```
122 Part II-Book of Air
```
```
and balanced in the matter, then do the pondeirous forces of
Assiah, the Knave, engage in powerful combat.
The Kings of Water and Earth stand in squares of the
Aries System. The Kings of Air and Fire stand in squares of
the Cancer System. If Water or Earth be the Prirne Player the
opposing Bishops attack the squares on which they stand. If
Air or Fire be the :Prime Player they do not.
The King is the Ace, and the King of the ]?rime Player
being the piece on whose action that of all the foirces depends,
it is this King that, at every move he makes, causes a new
whirl to be set up :in the other forces.
```
The Pawns move on the Cancer and Aries systems, and they
generate the whirl (of the elemental forces in the direction of
play.


Openings

I

n modern chess the "opening" is considered to be the moves
made in the first phase of any game, commencing with the
initial position and continuing until all sides have brought
out their pieces and the middle-game is reached. In Enochian
chess, due to the fact that middle-game play is sometimes
reached within five rounds of play (i.e., five moves per player),
without all the pieces having brought out into play, the opening
play examples provided here are semi-openings, reproducing
the first four to six or more rounds of play.
In the examples given below, "game recording" abbreviation
codes are used, as described in the earlier chapter, "Recording
Game Play." The commentaries on the game openings will not
make much sense unless read in conjunction with the actual
moves made on your chessboard. In this way you will be able to
see the situation described in the text.


```
124 Part 11-Book of Air
```
Earth and Fire Board Play Settings

Earth of Earth a.nd Earth of Fire Setting (KR, B, Q, N)
One opening move would be to make an attacking move with
either the Queen or Knight. However, this approach has been
proven to result in a situation of vulnerability for the piece con-
cerned, another piece of the same element or the ally. For exam-
ple, Earth Queen's move to 3c or lc forces the Fire Knight to
move to either 3c, immediately threatening the Water pawn on
W4b (Water Angle, square 4b). If the WP4b (Water pawn on 4b)
moves to W4c, the Fire Knight on F3c (Fire Angle, square 3c) can
eventually go to W4b. threatening the Water Bishop. The Earth
Queen has nowhere of any consequence to move. Also, if she is
on E3c, this will restrict her Bishop's and Knight's chances of
movement from the back-row lineup. Hence the values of the
Queen, Bishop and Knight diminish. The Fire Knight could have
gone to E3d in response to the Earth Queen's first move, threat-
ening the Earth Angle the same way as it would the Water Angle
if it moved as descrilbed earlier. A move of this nature (in this
case made by the Queen) is called a "chain-reactor."
If the Earth Knight makes the opening move t,o A3d or E3c, in
both cases AP4b or IF4b is threatened. (It shoulld be noted that
this pawn's value would be the least, of all the pawns in this par-
ticular setting.) In the case of an opening move with a Knight, the
following could take place. Earth Knight to 3c would result in
blocking pawn movement necessary to release the Bishop. If
Water did not follow up on Earth's move by attacking Air, there-
fore forcing Air to act in defense rather than attack, Air would
then attack Earth with Knight to 3c, causing the Earth Knight
move to burn out, for a pawn and Bishop would immediately be
threatened. If the Earth Knight moves to A3d in its first move, a
light but eventually unsuccessful attack would be made, if the
move is declined by Air. If a Knight move is declined and the pawn
is unmoved, the opponent may lose a pawn, but his or her position
is left relatively unthreatened. It seems in some sequences of this
opening, P4b must be sacrificed if an equilibrium is to be kept.


```
Openings 125
```
Pawn opening-Earth to move first: P3c opens the way up
for the Bishop, but removes one opening for the Queen and
Knight, leaving the Knight with one avenue of escape and the
Queen two. An advantage is the Bishop on a direct line to its
ally's Plb, discouraging the Air Knight from moving into the
Water Angle due to the Earth Bishop's covering that diagonal.
If Earth opens with Plc, it would seem to be a totally defen-
sive move, but if you look a little harder you will see that an
attack by either of the opponents' Knights would be totally inef-
fective. For example:

```
E F W A
1 Plc NE3d Plc P3c
2 P4c NE4b Blb B4c
3...
```
It is a waste of time for the Fire Knight to continue its
attack (which is also the case if Air makes the attack), as in the
moves following the Earth Bishop would move out of threat to
lb and the Fire Knight would have no safe square to move to.
So far the main direction of attack seems to be the Bishops,
at the supposed cost of the Knights, if they are successful. The
question then arises as to the value of the pieces. Do the Bish-
ops have more value than the Knights in this play setting, or is
it just that the way is open for these moves to be made-the
obvious? What is obvious, as you will see in the following exam-
ples, is that piece value becomes more evident after each open-
ing move has been made. This will also depend on how each
angle opens, which will result in the same or different piece
values in each angle. It is important, though, to get as many
pieces working as possible. The crunching point is, at what
stage of the game? You will probably find in this setting that,
after the initial flurry of attack, the Knight's move is very
restricted as to what squares he can move to in safety. Such is
also the case for the Queen. The only operational piece apart
from these would be the Bishop, if freed from his position. A P2b
must remain where it is, as the opposing Bishops are on a


```
126 Part 11-Book of Air
```
potentially direct line to the Kings. The Knight and Queen also
have a stronger follow through if the Bishop is working with
them. In addition, z~lthough the pawns seem rather passive in
their approach, their moves create a defense, pending attack,
plus providing openings for the back line and acting as probable
backups. In conclusi.on, for the Earth of Earth a:nd Earth of Fire
settings, the strongest and most stable opening moves are by
the pawns, followed by the Bishops. Although not directly
attacking, they are creating a strong fortress from which to fire.

Example 1
Earth Board, playing widdershins

```
E F W A
1 P4c Plc P4c Plc
2 P3c Blb P3c Blb
3 P4d N3c ... see examples l(a) and l(b)
```
This is a sensible opening for all parties: Earth and Water
hold initial priority on the P4b, bringing it into .use and thereby
turning it into a pawn of importance, while Fire and Air concen-
trate on putting their Bishops on the lb square, thus creating
two firing lines right; across the board-two important positions.

Example 1(a)

The Water Queen moves into the F3d square and exposes
itself to the Fire Bishop. The initial intention is a quick break in
the Fire lines by a QxP3b and QxBlb, leaving an. opening for the
Water Knight to pin the King. But Fire King to 2a foils Water's
plan and results in a. wasted move, as the Fire pawns could have
pushed Water Queen back. Air, on the other hand, moves Queen


```
Openings 127
```
to 3c and presses Earth, but Earth turns its forced move to its
advantage. This situation brings into question the early move of
the Queen as an aggressor rather than as a defense.
Example l(b) shows an improved play on example l(a) and
gives some very interesting possibilities:

Example 1(b)

```
E F W A
3 - - ...Q lc N3c
4 B4c? P4c P4d P2c
5 ... see examples l(b)(i) and l(b)(ii)
```
Water moves the Queen to lc, forcing the Air Knight to the
only safe square. Although this seems like an aggressive move,
it is in the long run a defensive move which also protects the
Water King from the obvious. Earth placed B4c in a position
which threatens FP4b and the Fire Queen. The Fire Queen
could have moved to E4d, but it would eventually have been
pushed back or lost to Earth's pawns, or Bishop takes pawn,
threatening the Knight and the Queen. Earth gets a piece and a
pawn in exchange for a piece. So Fire offers its Queen in the
hope of achieving an even exchange. Example l(b)(i) shows this.

Example I(b) (i)
A straightforward exchange with Water next to move.

```
E F W A
5 BF3axQ RxB ... and so on.
```
Example I(b)(ii)

```
Earth ignores the Queen offering and pushes a pawn for-
ward. This was not such a good move, since the Fire Knight now
```

```
128 Part 11-Book of Air
```
```
finds a safe but threatening position. Water presents a threat
similar to Earth, but Air ignores it and pushes P2c to 2d, gain-
ing quite an advantage. Water and Earth will have quite a fight
on their hands. At this point it appears that a B4c move by
Earth is rather worthless unless it is going to capture a Queen.
```
Example 1(c)

```
The move EB4d is substituted for EB4c. Th.is move threat-
ens the opponents' Kings and threatens a possible break in
their pawn lines. But it is not a serious situation, because Fire
and Air still have their moves to make. This sh~ows that Earth
moved out too soon and put itself and its ally at an apparent
disadvantage. So why doesn't Earth forget ab'out moving the
Bishop and keep it back behind the lines and utilize another
piece? If you experiment further, you'll find the Earth and
Water P4c opening to be weak; the Plc and Bllb openings are
much stronger.
```
```
Example 2
Using Air and Fire opening moves as in Example l(b). Playing
widdershins, Earth Board.
```
```
E F W A
1 Plc Plc Plc Plc
2 Blb Blb Blb Blb
3 N3c P4c N3c P4c
4 QAld N3c* P4c P3c
5 NF4d K2a BE4c P4d ...
```
```
This appears to be a good opening on all accounts, yielding
many possibilities for an interesting game to follow; however,
Fire may have made a fatal move with N3c. He or she should
```

```
Openings 129
```
have moved P3c to prevent Earth moving Knight to F4d, which
may start a chain reaction that could capture the Fire King.

Example 3
An opening that becomes a quick middle- and endgame. Playing
deosil, Fire Board.

```
F
P3c
B4c
Qlc
P2c
PxWQ
NE2c+?
B3b
Resigns
```
```
A
N3c
Plc
Pld?
PE4a
P2c
P2d
PE4b
P~c?
Qlc?
Resigns
```
```
W
P3c
QF3d
B3b
P2c
N2b
BE2cxN
RFlcxQ
BE4axP?
BA3cxN+
```
... a win in 10 moves. Although Earth was on the defensive
by the second move, Water came immediately out as the aggres-
sor. Air's attack is weak, which costs in the long run. Water sac-
rifices its Queen to make an opening for its Knight and threaten
the Fire Queen. With NE2c, Fire panics and makes a blunder
that costs the game. The Earth Queen makes room for the
Earth Rook later, and the Water Bishop takes a pawn, a ques-
tionable move. But Air gives Earth time by moving Qlc, with
Earth and Water finishing in glory. This is an example of Fire
and Air not working in harmony when Water and Earth did.

Example 4
A variation on Example 3. Playing deosil, Fire Board.

```
F E A W
1 P3c N3c N3c P3c
2 B4c P4c P lc QF3d
3 Qlc NF4dxP Blb B3b
```

```
Part 11-Book of Air
```
```
F E A W
4 P2c Plc QW3d QFlbxP
5 %Q Blb R2a? NF2cxP...
```
The opening is as in example 3, but in move 3 Air brought
the Bishop to lb instead of Pld. Water moves B3b to cover the
Knight, and Fire threatens the Water Queen and Knight and
makes an escape square for its own Knight. Earth opens up for
its Bishop in an attempt to free up its back row, anticipating an
ANE4b. Air puts additional pressure on Water, working in
greater harmony with its ally, but it appears that Air has not
advanced enough: the Fire King took the Queen to avoid a check
with the Earth or Water Knight on F2c. The Earth Bishop
moved to cover the Water Bishop. The Water Knight in move 5
continues the attack on Fire to gain a piece and pawn for its
Queen. Fire is now at an extreme disadvantage. From this
game play you can see that P3c and N3c have pi-oved to be both
an advantage and disadvantage. The key is to turn your ques-
tionable moves to advantage.
To open with the Queen's pawn opens the lines for one's
Bishop, which appears to be the least vulnerable piece in open-
ing play, therefore the most mobile and valuable. A P2c opening
puts one's opponent in a position where he or slie cannot move
P4b without allowing an easy forward march. However, do not
move P2c to 2d, as it will leave your opponent's Knight free to
move to 3d, holding that position as a potential threat if your
ally attempts to advance P3d. This is one reason why the
Knight is not moved too soon in this opening, to wait and see
which way your opponent is going to move.


```
Openings 131
```
```
Air of Earth and Air of Fire Setting (KB, R, N, Q)
```
This setting has proven rather deceptive in its opening play,
showing the Bishop as a troublesome piece. It either becomes
trapped in the early game or one has to play boldly, if not reck-
lessly, to obtain an opening for it. This play setting does not leave
too much room for a careful defensive opening that opens up a
seemingly solid play. The opening is volatile, giving an apparent-
ly quick (Air) form of play. Early checks are tempting and easy-
but not advisable, as shown below. It is far better to position your
pieces and develop your game. The following examples are played
on the Fire Board, moving widdershins, Air of Fire setting. You'll
see that premature moves in this opening are tempting, as the
pieces come into play quite quickly with early exchanges.

Example 1
A bad opening for Earth.

```
F W A E
I P3c P3c P2c QAlc+
2 NE2d N2c K2b P2c
3 NE3bxP+ NA4axQ+ KlcxQ K2b
4 NE2d P4c N4c P4c
5 P2c NW2c...
```
Fire and Water open defensively, preventing an N2d attack.
Air baits Earth but also opens up the lines for its Bishop, leav-
ing Earth vulnerable to the Fire Knight. Earth cannot now
move its Knight to open up protection for the Queen and has to
move a pawn to provide an escape for its King. Water pushes
forward with NA4a, taking the Queen and checking the King,
but can do nothing to hinder Fire. However, Water skillfully
keeps one step ahead of Air, as you will see with later pawn
moves. Earth had to move P2c and K2b to push the Fire Knight
and prevent a Plc attack from the Fire Queen and Rook, in the
event of EPlc. This shows how a seemingly reckless opening
can lure the opponent to a premature move that causes difficul-
ties if each move is not carefully thought out.


```
132 Part II-Book of Air
```
```
Example 2
Fire Board playing widdershins.
```
```
A premature move for Water. The P3c opening prevents an
N2d attack to 3b cheek. P2c is best moved after the Knight has
moved from the back file. Here, Water moves P2c too early and
loses its Knight. Earth and Fire are more cautious and position
themselves for a stronger game.
```
Example 3
An opening where a Hoor defense, as in Example 3(a), or
Counter-Hoor defense, as in Example 3(b), would have better
been played.

```
F W A E
1 Q4c NF2d Q4c NA2d
2 P~C Q4c P~C Q4c
3 B3c QxB BF3cxQ NA3bxP+
4 QW4bxP NF3bxP+ K2b NA2d
5 NE2d P3c BA4d Plc
6 NE3b+ ...
```
If Water had not moved NF2d7 Fire would have been able to
continue its advance on Earth with NE2d and RElb+. Earth
must also anticipate this and either ignore Air's attack, espe-
cially if Water does not ignore the bait, and move N4c to cover
the opponents' Queens and attacking Knight square, or not
move the Knight, so that lb is covered by two pieces. But if
Water ignored the Queen opening, Earth would also move
NA2d. However, this could be a disadvantage (see above exam-


```
Openings 133
```
```
ple). Fire and Air must move P2c to make an escape for their
Kings if the opponent Queens go to lc of their respective angles,
or if the opponent's Queen moves elsewhere to open a line for
the Rook. FB3c covers P4b, leaves an opening for its King and
attacks the opponent's Knight. FRlb instead of B3c is a bad
move, as the opponent's Q4bxP immediately causes difficulty.
```
Example 3(a)
Hoor defense.

```
A King capture in four moves. Air erred by N2c; the move
should have been P2c.
```
Example 3(b)
Counter to Hoor defense.

```
Air must move P2c in the second move, and not N2c as in
the above example, to counter the Hoor defense and create some
form of equilibrium.
```
```
In move 2, the Earth Queen checked the Air King to force
the Air King to block its Bishop. Fire takes the opportunity to
get its Bishop out to 4d instead of 3c and forces a Water Rook
move, therefore not giving Water a chance to put further pres-
sure on Fire. In move 4, the Fire King becomes more active, pre-
```

```
134 Part II-Book of Air
```
venting a Water Knight attack. A Water pawn pushes forward,
chasing the Fire Bishop. Air takes an exposed pawn, and Earth
moves defensively, preventing a Fire Knight to E2d. In move 5,
the Fire Bishop makes WPlb vulnerable to Water, causing
another forced move. At this point there are many possibilities
for middle-game play.

Example 4

```
F W A E
1 Plc N4c P2c Q2c
2 N2c QFlcxP+ BF3c NA2d
3 PxQ RxP+ P3c NA3b+
4 K2b RFld K2b NAlc
5 NW4cxN PxN Rla...
```
The move Plc is a vulnerable opening, but thanks to Air
foreseeing a King capture with EQF4b, Fire escapes. Fire's fool-
ish opening leaves Air vulnerable, but Air manages to escape
from this unscarred.

```
Water of Earth and Water of Fire Setting (KQ, N, R, B)
```
This opening play position provides a fluent defensive game in
which you will find that, without good defense, an easy advan-
tage can be obtained. But if the opposition plays well in defen-
sive moves, the game can be long and difficult. Cooperation
with one's ally is easy in this setting and is essential for a
strong game. An early Earth Bishop to A2d would put pressure
on FP4b and the Fire Rook, because the Water Bishop is on the
same diagonal. The Fire Knight would have to respond, and
eventually Earth and Water would get a Knight and pawn
exchange for the loss of a Bishop. Fire can avoid this by moving
P3c, which blocks the Water Bishop. Earth would then
exchange a Bishop for a pawn. It may be a move you can
attempt with an unsuspecting player, but not an experienced
one. An early Knight move could be fatal for the Knight and


```
Openings 135
```
sacrifice a pawn unnecessarily. For example, if ENlc, the Fire
Bishop would capture EP4b, and in Earth's next move the Rook
would have to move to safety. The move N3c is just as futile,
because the Knight is a valuable piece for middle- and endgame
play and the Fire Bishop would immediately capture it.

Example 1
Earth Board playing widdershins.

```
E F W A
1 P3c P3c P3c P3c
2 Plc P4c B3b Qlc
3 B3b N4b Q lc B3b
4 P4c B2c P2c P4c
5 N4b P4d P4c N4b..
```
```
An interesting variation, which shows caution by all play-
ers. The P3c opening opens up the Bishop diagonals and blocks
your opponents' Bishops. In move 2, EPlc seems to be a defen-
sive and restrictive move; nevertheless, the strong FP4c begins
to open up for a future FN4b and advancing Rook's pawn. Water
also opens defensively, and Air attacks. After AQlc, the Air
Queen can go on next move to E4c, attacking the Earth Knight,
so Earth's next move (move 3) must be B3b. Meanwhile, Fire
and Water are working at moving their pieces out into play,
Water moving forward more aggressively with Qlc and Air
forced to move B3b. Move 4 shows all angles progressing in
positioning their pieces. At move 5, Fire moves P4d to prevent a
Water Bishop from moving to E3d, which would have eventual-
ly threatened the Fire Rook and Knight, and Air's Queen, or a
Water Bishop to W4c threatening the Air Rook. Air moves its
Knight into play at A4b, then goes to either 3d or W4d if Water
moves P3c to 4d. On move 6, Earth opens up its Bishop line of
fire with P4d.
```

```
136 Part 11-Book of Air
```
Example 2
Earth Board playing widdershins.

```
An example of allies working together, but is the loss of a
Rook and Bishop worth one piece and a doubled pawn?
```
```
E
1 P3c
2 BA2d
3 BAlcxQ
4 RAlcxN
5 P4c
6 Q3a
7 QAldxP
```
```
W A
P~c Qlc
Q3c P3c
P2c NlcxB
QA4axB PlcxR
QA4c Pld
QE4d P3d
```
```
In order for Earth's attack to be successful, Water must be
very careful to first block Fire and second to attack Air. Water
ignores the Fire Queen's threat and restricts the Air Bishop's
move instead by Plc. Air would have been better off to move Plc
or 3c before its Queen moved. Fire gets the message and quickly
moves with a P3c. It is characteristic of this play setting that
Queens appear active in the opening. With only two pieces
threatening Alc, Air decides there is no immediate threat, for it
also has two covering pieces, Knight and pawn. Air therefore
moves P3c, attempting to push the Earth Bishop away and open
up its own lines. There seems to be little else it could do at this
point. If the Air Bishop takes the Water Queen, it would only
bring the Water Knight out into play and later make matters
worse. Earth moves in with its attack, which initially looks weak
and premature but eventually gains a piece. The Water Queen,
however, is vulnerable to being chased around the board. The
Fire Bishop move, however, was premature without backup and
ineffectual unless planning to take the Queen.
```
Example 3
Fire Board playing widdershins. Queen opening ignored-
Queen sacrifice.


```
Openings
```
Example 3(a)

This opening invokes a fluid effect. Each angle ignores the
Queen threat, as in the opening play. The piece values of the
Queen and Bishop are here considered equal; therefore, a simple
Queen and Bishop exchange would be a wasted exercise with no
significant gain. If the opening is ignored by all parties and Fire
moves P3c in the second move, it will expose itself and its ally to
exchanging their Bishops for Queens, but this sets off another
chain reaction where all again lose Bishops and Queens. As men-
tioned earlier, a Queen and Bishop exchange is a wasted exercise.
A more stable opening is given in example 3(b), but here
you must not completely duplicate your opponents' moves.
The advantage lies with the angle that has the first move of
each round.

Example 3(b)

```
F
Q lc
P3c
B3b
P4c
P3d
N3c
NE4d
QW4cxP
QA4bxN
Plc
```
```
Quite an organized arrangement, but the version given above
from move 7 shows that, if Water had followed suit in move 7, Air
would have also been able to do so, and Water and Earth would
```

```
138 Part II-Book of Air
```
```
have suffered. Instead, Water and Earth force a situation that
could turn out even all 'round. Bishops may not take Queens
because the Knight is covering the 4c squares. However, Earth
and Air respond by making a Queen-Bishop exchange. The Fire
Queen takes the Water Knight, the result of an oversight by
Water. But Water has not been beaten yet. Watch the potentials
from this point on and play the rest out by yourself. Have fun!
```
Fire of Earth and Fire of Fire Setting (KN, Q, B, R)
This is a very exciting play setting which encourages early attacks
and active openings; however, nothing ends up as it initially
appears to be. Some very difficult games can be formed from this
setting. You will see from the examples that an early Rook attack
can open up your own Rook escape square. Bringing the Rook out
too early can be dangerous. But this is one setting where the Rook
will always play an important role in the opening. The Knights
are restricted in opening moves and best left until later in this
opening, and the Queens, although initially appearing weak, can
be brought into useful play. They are still limited in their protec-
tiveness, however, but as pieces of defense their role is functional.
A better opening is given in example 3(b), where premature and
failed Rook attacks shown in the first examples are not used.

Example 1
Fire Board playing widdershins.

```
F W A E
1 N2c RFld N2c RAld
2 P4c P4c P4c P4c
3 N4b? B4b RWld B4b
4 REld N2c? B4b P2c
5 RE lc Plc R3a K2b ...
```
Fire and Air attack early, pushing the opponents' Rooks out.
However, the Rook move is limited because of P4c and N2c cov-
ering the center. Earth and Water must move P4c to prevent


```
Openings 139
```
```
B3d, leaving two-to-one on the King-Knight's pawn, and also
restricting their opponents' Knight moves. Air and Fire must
also protect their Knights from B3d and also look at opening an
escape route for their Rooks, as their opponents' P2b is not
restricted from moving 2c. Fire's N4b is a questionable move
and may cause restriction, but it does cover the Rook if it moves
Elc. In move 4, WN2c prevents an R4d, but with the Earth
Rook already on that line, a P2c may have been more effective.
```
Example l(a)
Rook's Gambit declined.

```
F W A E
3 B4b P2c B4b P2c
4 P3c B2b P~c? P4d
5 P4d P4d P4d BA3d
6 BAlc ...
```
```
If at move 3, Water and Earth move P2c before B4b and Fire
and Air anticipate by B4b, the Rooks have a greater choice of
escape squares. Then a pawn advance can take place to build up
control of the central board. The Water Bishop moves 2b to help
cover the center. However, what can Air do to escape the Earth
Bishop attack? Move AN3a, or Fire Bishop to Alc? Water can
prevent N3a by threatening the Air Rook. Air has to sacrifice its
Knight. In move 4, Air should have moved B3c.
```
Example 2
Fire Board playing deosil.

```
F E A W
1 P4c P4c P4c P4c
2 Q2c B4b B4b Q2c
3 REld RAld B3c P3c
4 B4b P2c Q2c RFld
5 R2a B3c R2a N3b
6 Q4a...
```

```
140 Part II-Book of Air
```
```
An example where the Queen plays a more active role. P4c
opens a Bishop to Rook attack, but a simple Q2c countermove
prevents B4b, or later threatens the Bishop. If you are going to
move to 4b, leave an escape square. The move P2c seems poor,
because it blocks both Queen and Knight. A point needing men-
tion is that an early Q2c defense would operate better in wid-
dershins play.
```
Example 3
Fire Board playing widdershins.

```
F W A E
1 P~C P~C P~C Q2c
2 B2b N3b B2b P4c
3 Q4c? P4c ... See (a) and (b)
```
In this opening, the players ignore the obvious but futile early
Rook attack. Allies are working together, but Fire and Air have a
greater control of the central board. Some variations of this are:

Example 3(a)

```
F W A E
3 - - ... BF3c BW2d
4 Plc BF4cxQ R3a BE4b
5 R3a R3a P3c P3c
6 PxB ...
```
The Air Bishop supports Fire by a threat to the Water Rook.
This leaves the Water Rook trapped. Earth delays Air by a Bish-
op threat to the Air Rook. Fire can do very little to help as yet,
and Water opens up an escape square for Rook. Air must move
its Rook and so cannot follow through with a Bishop attack. The
Earth Bishop then threatens the Fire Rook, forcing another
move, and the Water Rook escapes capture. Fire gets a doubled
pawn out of this exchange.


```
Openings 141
```
Example 3(b)

```
F W A E
3 - -... B3c R4b
4 Plc P3d PW3dxP P4d
5 QA3d P3dxP K2B R4c
6 FQAld ...
```
If Earth had moved Alc instead of E4b, the Air King would
finally trap the Earth Rook, unless Earth or Water could buy
some time to move out of difficulty. Water is keen to open up its
Rook line and advance its pawns. Air responds. Fire is not mov-
ing characteristically and seems bound up as of move 5, show-
ing Earth and Water coming in strong. What would you do in
move 6? FQAld? In both examples (a) and (b), FQ4c has proven
to be a questionable move.

Air and Water Board Play Settings

Earth of Air and Earth of Water Setting (KR, N, Q, B)

The variations of effective openings available for this setting
appear limited. Bishop to opponent's 2d offers little because of
a P3c defense, and until your opponent's Bishop has moved
from 4a, the Knights and Queens are restricted in movement.
P2c cannot be moved before a 3c or lc as the King would
immediately be exposed. An early Qlc will force your oppo-
nent's Bishop to your 2d and can cause a loss of the Bishop if
your ally works well with you, or an early no-gain exchange.
Plc advance has been found more effective towards middle
game. If a player opens P3c, player 2 (player 4 if playing
deosil) must open 3c as well to provide an escape for its Bish-
op, as player 1 can follow with Qlc. Mistakes are easy in this
setting, exactness being needed. B3b instead of 3c seems nec-
essary as the player preceding you (following you if playing
deosil) can immediately go Qlc then on to your 4c, threatening
your Knight.


```
142 Part II-Book of Air
```
```
Example 1 gives a strong opening and seems to be the best
alternative for a conservative player, but for other players
Example 3 may be more enjoyable.
```
```
Example 1
Water Board playing widdershins. Pawn March.
```
```
W A E F
1 P3c P3c P3c P3c
2 B3b B3b B3b B3b
3 P2c P2c P2c P2c
4 Plc Plc Plc Plc
5 K2b Pld K2b Pld
6 P2d K2b P2d K2b...
```
```
This opening appears conservative and initially safe for all
players. Each player is well protected and positioned, ready for
a long fight ahead.
```
Example l(a)

```
W A E F
3 P2c P4c" P2c P2c
4 Plc N4b Plc. ..See examples
l(a)(i) and l(a)(ii)
```
```
Air moves P4c, a bad move which may cost Air some pieces
later. If Water had moved QF3d in move 3, the Air Bishop would
have had to capture the Queen to prevent further difficulty.
```
Example l(a)(i)

```
W A E F
4 - - -.. .Nlc?
5 B4c? N2c Pld P2d?
6 B3b P4d PF4bxP...
```

```
Openings 143
```
Fire makes too many mistakes, which will weaken Fire and
Air's positions for middle-game play. Water wastes two moves
with B4c, but Earth comes on strong.

Example 1 (a)(ii)

```
W A E F
4 - - -.. .Plc
5 P4c N2c P3d P4c
6 K2b Plc N3c K2b
7 ...
```
If Fire had moved Plc and P4c, as in this example, Fire and
Air would have had a stronger footing in further play. It would
have also caused all the other players to reconsider their next
moves. It is clear in this opening that bringing your Knight out
too early can be inhibiting, but the following opening shows a
different story.

Example 2
Air Board playing deosil.

```
A W F E
1 P3c Q3c? Plc? P3c
2 B3b P4c P3c B3b
3 P4c N4b B2c P4c
4 N4b N2c P4c N4b
5 P4d? QA4a? P4d PA4dxP
6 PxP PF4dxP PxP...
```
```
Water's pressure on the Air Bishop seems unnecessary, inas-
much as Air had already provided an escape. Earth did not fol-
low up with the same move as Water so as to open up its lines
for the Bishop. While Air and Fire bring in their 4d pawns to
cover the center, Water sacrifices its Queen to hold Air up in its
moves. Earth makes the exchange, but Air does not take the
obvious course and moves the Queen to open up a second firing
line, after first capturing an Earth pawn.
```

```
144 Part II-Book of Air
```
Example 3
Air Board playing widdershins.

```
A E F W
1 Q lc BA2d P3c Qlc
2 BW2d P3c Qlc P3c
3 BWlcxQ Q lc B3b NxB
4 P~C BxQ QxB RxQ
5 NxB P4c...
```
```
An Air Queen attack starts the game, but may be a mistake
for the first move, because Water can now pressure Air. Then
Fire must move P3c to protect P4b. With a Water Queen attack
following, a chain reaction sets in. The Air Bishop must move
W2d because N3c, which opens up protection for Air, exposes
the Knight to capture by the Earth Bishop. Earth must, in move
2, go P3c because of Bishop crossfire to P4b. Air must capture
the Water Queen because there is nowhere to run, and the same
for the Earth Bishop. However, Earth must first force a Fire
move, to prevent the Fire Queen from taking the Water Bishop.
In move 4, Air could have moved P4c to avoid a pawn loss from
an eventual NxP. Then NxN and BxN, with both Air and Water
losing Knights. Air moves P3c instead, so the Earth Bishop
must immediately capture the Air Queen because it has
nowhere to go. By the time move 5 is over, the Passives would
have two Queens, one Bishop and one pawn, the Actives two
Bishops and one Queen.
```
```
Air of Air and Air of Water Setting (KB, Q, N, R)
This setting provides potential for many quick exchanges in the
game opening. An early King attack can be allowed by P2c,
which will prove to be a disadvantage if your ally does not back
you up. For example, if in move 1, AP2c7 Earth Knight to A2d,
FP3c7 WN2c, then in move 2 the Air King would move to 2b and
save the day or move the Rook to Wld, in which case the Air
Rook is lost (for example, 2 ARWld NA3bxP+ FN2c WRFld,
```

```
Openings 145
```
3 AK2b ENxAR. Or 2 AK2b EP3c FN2c WRFld, 3 ARWld). A
Plc move only adds to the block on the Bishop and is subject to
a Queen and Rook attack to check. A P4c seems of no particular
value in the first moves. Early Rook captures as shown in exam-
ple 1 below can be avoided as shown in example 2.

Example 1
Air Board playing widdershins. Knights Charge:

```
A E F W
1 NW2d N2c RE ld Plc?
2 NW3bxP+ Q4c N2c Klb
3 Q4c K2a NxR K~c?
4 QWlcxP QxFP RA4c N4c
5 NWlaxB+ P4c? RW3d Klb
6 QA4c+ QF2d RW4d KxNla
7 RxK++ ...
```
Fire and Air start off aggressively. Earth tries to delay Fire's
forward moves by threatening the Fire Rook and pawn. Fire
ignores the pawn threat and attacks the Water Rook, knowing
that Water's next move must be Klb. However, the Water King is
not out of the heat yet, as you will see in moves 3 and 4. In move
4, if WP2b had taken the Air Queen on square Wlc and immedi-
ately checked, then a King capture would have followed. Earth
seems helpless because of an early N2c, but, in move 5, could have
moved N4d instead of P4c and prevented the Fire Rook move.
Air's discovered check was well done, with the help of the Fire
Rook, forcing the Water King to lb. If in move 5 the Earth Rook
had sacrificed itself by RAlbxP+ this would have given Water
King time to capture Fire Rook and move out to a free square.
If in move 3 Water Queen takes Knight instead of K2c, in
move 5 Fire Rook would have had to go W3b, for example:


```
Part II-Book of Air
```
```
A E F W
7 QF3d+ NA2d Q2c K2a
8 K2a RxP RxQ+ K3b
9 NxK+...
```
```
In move 5, the Water King cannot capture the Air Knight or
Queen because they are covering each other; e.g., the Rook covers
the Queen and the Queen covers the Knight. The move WP2b can-
not capture the Queen because it will expose the King, and there
is nothing Earth can do at this stage to restrict Fire. The Water
Queen has nowhere to go: only the King can be moved, because
the Knight covers a crucial 3a square. On move 6, the Air Queen
must move away from the pawn's threat. Moves 7 and 8 show a
probable direction of play. Water hoped an Earth to Air attack
would hinder an immediate capture, but Air ignored the bait.
The following two examples show you a defense against the
Knight's charge.
```
Example 2
Air Board playing deosil. Knight's Charge Defense, playing deosil.

```
A W F E
1 NW2d Q4c N2c NA2d
2 Q4c RFld P3c NA3bxP+
3 K2a K2a N4d NA2d
4 P2c N2c P2c NA4cxQ?
5 RW lbxP R3a NxN P2c
6 R4a NxN Q4c. ..
```
The Queen comes out to 4c so the King can move to 2a and
cover any attack on 3b. Earth must put pressure on Air instead
of Fire to save the Water Rook, because Air must be slowed down
in its attack. Otherwise NW3bxP in move 2 or 3 would create a
crossfire to the Water King and Rook. Fire continues threatening
Water, but it does not hold back the threat to Air. The Earth
Knight captures the Air Queen, which was not covered, and Air
has to move its Rook rather than chase the Knight with its King.
As you will see, the struggle continues from moves 4 to 6.


```
Openings 147
```
Example 3
Air Board playing widdershins. Knight's Charge defense, wid-
dershins:

```
A E F W
1 NW2d NA2d N2c RFld
2 Q4c RAlbxP+ Q4c Q4c
3 K2a R3a QW4bxP K2a ...
```
```
The Knight's charge opening is deflected comfortably by
defense. However, Earth takes a pawn but fails a King capture.
Fire and Air fail their King capture but obtain a pawn.
```
Example 4
Water Board playing deosil.

```
Although N4c covers your opponents' 2c, preventing a
Knight to Rook threat, it allows your opponents' Bishops to
come into play early in the game with a Knight chase. In move
2, Earth and Water must move R3a to avoid a pawn fork on the
opponent's 2d. The Fire and Air Bishop's 4d moves prove annoy-
ing, although not difficult, since P3b is covered with Rooks to
3a. Fire and Air chase the Knights too hard, however, and
return the threat to themselves with a Knight's forced move to
their 2d, even as they do the same. See 4(a) below.
```
```
Example 4(a)
```

```
148 Part II-Book of Air
```
Water and Earth are one step ahead and capture the Air King,
freezing Air's pieces. What Fire and Air should have done was:

Example 4(b)

Earth Knight to opponent's 3b+ is a wasted move, since K2b
leaves the Knight out on a limb. It will eventually end up at 3c,
with Earth's pieces undeveloped and Fire and Air controlling
the middle board.

Example 5
Water Board playing widdershins.

```
W A E F
1 P3c N2c RAld P3c
2 N2c R3a P3c P2c
3 Q4c P3c P2c P2d
4 QFlc+ P4c P4c K2b
5 R3a P4d P2d REld ...
```
This opening was played with caution as the main factor. By
move 6, all are into middle-game play with no casualties.

```
Water of Air and Water of Water Setting (KQ, B, R, N)
```
Although a very difficult game for a clean opening, if played
carefully this is an opening that is slow but which provides
some solid play. If looking from an Air Board widdershins play
perspective, P3c must not be your first move because of a vul-
nerable 2c square where your opponent's Earth Knight could go
to your 2c and check, followed by his ally's Qlc or Nlc. Your Plb
cannot capture the Earth Knight because it will expose your
King to immediate capture. As in most openings, P4c is vulner-
able. Deosil play, however, shows a P3c move to be quite accept-


```
Openings 149
```
able, because by the time the opponent you are facing gets his
or her turn, your ally's Bishop is covering square 2c.
If you commence with a Queen opening, it pressures your
opponent's Knight, but unless you play this carefully your
pieces could wind up under pressure. For example, AQlc would
attract the Earth Knight to A3d. At your next turn, your Queen
must go 3c to avoid NxQ, which would eventually leave you
with a doubled pawn if your ally cannot move to help. There-
fore, Q3c seems better as a first move.
Pawn advances provide a strong play in this setting, and a
more defensive role for the Knight is advantageous.

Example 1
Water Board playing widdershins.

```
W
Q3c
P4c
Plc
Blb
P2c
P2d
N2b
QxB
```
```
A
NW3d
NW4b
Plc
P4c
Blb
Q3c
BE4d
R2a
```
```
E
Q3c
Plc
Blb
P2c
R2a
N2b
P2d
B3d
```
```
F
N3c
Plc
Blb
P4c
P2c
P2d
R2a
PxQ...
```
Queen openings must be played very carefully to avoid
being a liability. A WQ3c opening forces Air to move its Knight.
The Air Knight counterattacks, but Water is not worried
because its Plb is covered by two pieces, and a P4c will avoid a
pawn capture and force the Air Knight to move again. Earth fol-
lows suit to its ally, but Fire retaliates by adding to Air's threat
to Water. This results in a Knight hook (Air NW4b and Fire
N~c), which restricts the amount of safe squares for Water. The
first advance for all sides, although unsuccessful, establishes
positions, so the Fire and Water Angles take Earth's lead and
establish their Bishop diagonals. Air must delay Blb to avoid


```
150 Part II-Book of Air
```
an Earth Knight move to A3d; Fire also advances P4c. So far
the central board is covered from all angles, although Fire and
Air have a slight advantage. In move 5, Water makes an escape
square for its Knight and the other angles continue to position
themselves. As you will see in moves 6 and 7, each player con-
tinues to bring his or her pieces out, positioning them with a
small exchange in move eight. This opening leads to a long and
interesting game.

Example 2
Air Board playing widdershins.

```
A
1 Plc
2 B lb
3 P3c
4 P4c
5 BE4d
6 P2c
7 N2b
```
```
E F W
Plc Plc Plc
B lb B lb B lb
P4c P2c N3c
Q3c? N2b P2c
BF4d? P3c K2a
BE lb P2d P2d
P2c ...
```
This Pawn opening allows each player to open up Bishop
diagonals and advance their pieces. Once AP3c7 the Earth
Knight would have moved 2c+, but now that the Air Bishop is in
2b, this would be futile. EQ3c inhibits Earth's forward march
and is therefore a questionable move. In move five, the Air
Bishop makes a play for the Water Knight, so Earth recipro-
cates, but against Fire-a foolish gesture, because P3c is not
blocked. Water cannot move its Knight because of a discovered
check, so moves the King instead. The strong advance of Air
and Fire pawns could lead to a strong game on their part. In
move 7, although the Fire Bishop could move W4d so that both
Bishops threaten both Water and Earth, a Water Knight move
brings danger to Air King by a Water or Earth NA2c, King and
Rook fork. Then in move 8, the Water King cannot capture the
Fire Bishop because of Air Bishop cover. Water can bide its
time, and P3c solves that problem, trapping the Fire Bishop.


```
Openings 151
```
Therefore, a follow-through with the Fire Bishop is not advis-
able; FP4c to 4d is a better move. In Air's turn, it would have to
be 4d, opening up the Fire Bishop line to A3b to add additional
cover to the pin in the fork, although a Klb would have done
just as well.

```
Example 3
Air Board playing widdershins.
```
```
A E F W
1 Plc Plc Plc Plc
2 Blb Blb Blb Blb
3 P4c P4c P4c P4c
4 K2a N3c P~c? N3c
5 P3c BF4d+ Q3c B3d
6 NxB NF4b K2b PxN...
```
```
This is another version of a Bishop diagonal opening. In
move 3, P4c seems best because a Bishop to the opponent's 4d
would only have to retreat, and a P4c prevents a Knight to 3d.
In move 4, the Earth and Water Knights must move instead of
pawns because of a possible Knight pin. Move 5 sees the Earth
Bishop lineup and Fire attack, so the Air Knight must capture
the Earth Bishop. The move FP2c turned out at this point not to
be so good, because Water and Earth were still positioned to
move and threaten Fire.
```
```
Example 4
Water Board playing deosil. Rose of Air.
```

```
152 Part 11-Book of Air
```
```
The P3c opening is no danger in deosil play because, by the
time the player to the right of you gets his turn, your ally's Bishop
covers your 2c square. If in move 2, Water had moved B4c, Air still
would have had to move B3b to get a free square for the Rook, but
4c is a bad move because Water would eventually suffer a check.
B3b prevents N2c+. P2c opens up a route for the Knight, and P2d
keeps the opponents' Knight or Bishop away from their 4c. The
pattern on the board formed by the pieces and pawns resembles a
flower. The opening provides for an interesting but tricky game.
```
```
Fire of Air and Fire of Water Setting (KN, R, B, Q)
```
This setting is another difficult one for successful opening varia-
tions. P2c and P4c in succession would invoke a check from the
opponent's Queen on your 3c, then a possible Knight loss, because
only one piece at a time can be moved from the Throne Square. If
your opponent threatens your Queen with N2c, it would be wise to
go 2c instead of 4c; otherwise you would get something like exam-
ple l(b). The play from this setting is restrictive, showing the type
of restriction one would assume for Fire in a Water element, but
not so in an Air element. However, notice the play examples on the
Air Board, which operate a little quicker but still have to be care-
fully thought out to prevent disorder among the pieces.

Example 1
Water Board playing widdershins.

Example 1(a)

```
A
N2c?
P4c
B4b
B3c
N3a
Q2c
Plc
```
```
E
Q2c
P4c
B4b
P3c
P4d
BAld
N3b
```

```
Openings 153
```
```
W A E F
8 QxP BWld N2d QW2bxB
9 RxQ BW3bxN ...
```
```
Water opens to free its Bishop. Air threatens Earth with its
Knight, but this could be premature because it limits its own
Queen's escape. In move 2, Air has to go P3c because P4c would
cause the Water Queen to move to F3c+. The Fire Bishop to 2b
would leave P4b unprotected. Move 3 brings the pieces out, and
the Fire Queen to 4c threatens WP4B while moving the Fire
Queen away from the Earth Bishop's attack. Moves 4-5 show
an effort by all the players to position their pieces, advancing to
take an advantage on moves 6 and 7. Air takes more pressure
from Water and Earth, and Fire comes to the rescue and turns
the advantage to Fire and Air.
```
Example 2
Water Board playing widdershins.

```
W A E F
1 N2c Q2c N2c Q2c
2 P4c Plc P4c Plc
3 P3c P4c P3c P4c
4 Plc P3c Plc P3c
```
Example 2(a)

```
W A E F
5 P4d PxP P4d PxP
6 PxP BW3d PxP BE3d ...
```
Example 2(b)

```
W A E F
5 Klb P4d PxP N3b
6 Rla PxP BA3d BE3d
7 P3d Klb N3a N2d ...
```

```
154 Part 11-Book of Air
```
This opening shows how the Queens gain in strength if the
Knight opens. An early Knight and Queen opening limits pawn
movement, which may leave you at a loss for moves. Move 3 for
Water or Earth, although tempting, should not be Bishop to the
opponent's 3d, because the Bishop will eventually be lost; e.g.,
3 BF3d" P4c P4d P4c7 4 R3a B4b Q4c PxB. So here Water and
Earth move P3c in move 3. In example 2(a), P3d in move 5
would be alternately a restrictive move, so Water and Earth
move P4d. That too was not good, however, because the Knights
get into strife by move 7; the Queen's defense is too strong and
pins the Knights. In example 4(b), all players escape from early
strife and the game can continue with no early handicaps.
Water missed a chance in move 7 to effect an exchange that may
have given Earth and Water points up with a BF4cxP, because
the Earth Bishop would have followed through after the Fire
Queen captured the Water Bishop.

Example 3
Air Board playing deosil.

```
In move 1, if players one and three open P4c, player four is
advised also to open P4c; otherwise you may get something
like this:
```
```
Example 3(a)
```
```
P2c allowed the Air Bishop to move to F2d, threatening the
Water Queen. Water assumed that, when moving its Bishop
from the back line, the remaining Rook cover would be satisfac-
tory. Not so. FB4b doubles the attack. The Earth Queen moves
out to a pawn cover, threatening the Fire Bishop. ABxWQ is
safe because the Water Rook will be lost if Water reciprocates.
The Fire Bishop moves away from the Earth Queen threat.
```

```
Openings
```
Example 3(b)
Defense against P4c opening.

Example 4
Air Board playing deosil.

```
A W F E
1 P4c P4c P4c P4c
2 B4b B4b B4b B4b
3 P3c Q2c B3c Q2c
4 B3a P3c P2c P3c
5 P2c N3b Plc N3b
6 N3b ...
```
By move 3, the defense (Water and Earth) must not move
P3c; otherwise Air will move P3d, then EB3a, FP3d, WB3a, and
then Air Bishop takes Queen, EP2c and Fire Bishop takes
Queen. So Earth and Water must move Q2c. Thereafter, all
players position their pieces for a strong game.
Experiment with openings and see what you can come up
with.



Middle-Game

and

Endgame

##### E

nochian Chess middle- and endgame play can be as com-
plex as opening play, if not more so. Middle-game play
directly follows the opening. It is where strategical pat-
terns of moves are made to obtain an advantage over your
opponents. Piece value can change depending on players and
the opening game, but players must always try to preserve
pieces and pawns that may be of value in the endgame. Within
the opening, middle-game and endgame play combinations are
also used. Combinations are considered variations or groups of
variations of moves that force opponents' moves with the objec-
tive of obtaining an advantage. Combinations usually require a
piece or pawn sacrifice.
In the middle-game, players must build up their attack
power while at the same time creating a well-defended King.
Enochian chess players will find it difficult, as is not so much the
case in conventional chess, to make successful attacks and cap-


```
158 Part II-Book of Air
```
ture a King if the opponents are working well together, even if
the player's own ally is working well with him or her, which is
essential in most cases. You always have to watch your back.
Unlike ordinary chess, there are enemy forces coming up from
behind you as well as in front of you, and the odds can turn
against you very quickly. Try not to sacrifice too many pieces, as
you only have four pieces and four pawns to work with. Your ally
cannot always be there to help. Always keep your pieces and
pawns in touch with each other as well as with your ally's pieces
and pawns to ensure that cover or support is always near.
Try not to move automatically without reflection. Even if
you have previously worked out your next move, check the
board again for hidden threats; look ahead to sequences of
moves. Do not abandon control of the center to your adversary
or give up open lines. Seize them and hold them. Moves that
require a hasty retreat are a waste of time, so work toward real-
izable plans in your game; don't just make what seems to be the
best move at the time. Keep enemy pawns blockaded to prevent
an advancing line. Create weaknesses in your opponents' play
without weakening your own position; then follow through with
an attack. Make pawn sacrifices only if it creates a disadvan-
tage for your opponent, because pawns are valuable in the
endgame. They are a force to be reckoned with if they are used
well in middle-game play.
Endgame (or ending) play is the phase which follows the
middle-game. Endgames are when the play results in a forced
win, draw, withdrawal or stalemate. The character of endgames
is such that there are few rather than many piecedpawns pre-
sent, and they can be quite unique in their combinations,
depending on the expertise (or luck) of the players. To play a
good endgame shows great composing skill on the part of the
player. Endgames are strategically different from middle-
games: patience is required for very careful analysis of the
strategic value of each move. A pawn may have just as much
value as a piece. Because of a limited number of pieces and
pawns available, or because some of your remaining pieces are
blocked, you may have to move from a good position to a bad


```
Middle-Game and Endgame 159
```
```
FIGURE 37--QUEEN'S DEFENSE
AIR ANGLE, FIRE OF FIRE SETTING
THE AIR QUEEN COVERS SQUARES 1~ AND 3~
```
one. The defense may also try for a stalemate or a draw, defeat-
ing the purpose of a win.
Some interesting patterns form in endgames; however, they
are relative to the pieces left playing. The Queen is usually of
little value in the endgame accept as a defense, as for example
in figure 37 above.
If two allied Queens remain, they can, if carefully played,
work together and become stronger than a single opponent's
Knight. In figure 38, on the following page, a Queens' fork pre-
vents any movement from the Knight without its being cap-
tured. Therefore, in this instance, allowing your Knight to work
from the outer squares of a board rather than from the center
handicaps you if two opponent Queens are still operating.


```
160 Part II-Book of Air
```
```
FIGURE 38--QUEENS' FORK
THE KNIGHT CANNOT MOVE TO ANY SQUARE THAT IS NOT
COVERED BY EITHER THE AIR QUEEN OR FIRE QUEEN
```
```
Try to use your King more as an active piece in endgame
play: the King can be used defensively and aggressively, as you
can see in some of the following examples.
```
Example 1
Earth Board, Water of Earth setting, playing widdershins.

```
E F W A
1 P3c P3c P3c P3c
2 Plc P4c B3b Qlc
3 B3b N4b Qlc B3b
4 P4c B2c P2c P4c
5 N4b P4d P4c N4b
```

```
Middle-Game and Endgame 161
```
Example l(a)

```
E
P3d
PA4dxP
N2c
NxN
B4a
BA2d
PF4c
PF3dxFB
BF4b
BF3cxQ
BW4a
```
```
F
NE4d
P3d
Q3c
Plc
PW4c
B3d
R2a
Klb
Rla
K2a
K3b
```
```
F
R2a
K3a
PW3c
K3b
R4a
K2a
R4dxP+
RW4dxP
Klb
RF4c+
K~c?
K3b
KxR
Resigns
```
?pawn promoted to a Rook.

```
W
PF4dxP
K2b
P2d
QA4a
B2c
RFld
PxAB
N4b
K3a
BxAQ
K2a
```
```
W
Kla
P3d
PA4c
N3d
NA3b+
Plc
NA2d
NAl bxP
PA3c
NA2d
RW2a
NE4d
NW4c+
R2b
```
```
A
P4d?
P3d
B2c
PXN
N3d
BxWQ
RxWP
Q3c
QW ld
RxWB
RA3a
```
```
A
NE4a
RE2c
RE2bxP+?
PE3d
K2a
RE2a+
RE2c
RF3b
P2c
RF3c
K3a
R2c
RW4b
Resigns
```
Refer to the Water of Earth opening, example 1, page 135, for
commentary on moves 1 to 5. In move 6, Earth threatens the Fire
Knight, which must move. The Fire Knight goes to E4d, knowing
that any Water pawn advance would be counter checked by Air,


```
162
```
```
Air
```
```
Part IZ-Book of Air
```
```
Water
```
```
Earth Fire
```
leaving F3d free for advancing forces. Water opens up the back
ranks by taking a Fire pawn. Air also opens its ranks, but leaves
its pawn vulnerable, as shown in move 7, EPxAP, covered by a
Bishop and a Knight. Fire ignores the Water pawn and moves its
Rook's pawn forward. Water must not move P3d because of a sub-
sequent Air Bishop check to the Water King. Water also cannot
move B4c7 pinning the Air Rook and threatening the Air Knight,
because the Fire Knight covers W4c. The Water King therefore
comes forward to add cover to the Queen. The Air pawn ignores
possible capture by the Earth pawn and goes forward as bigger
bait. As you can see, in only two rounds of the game since open-
ing play, all players keep the pressure on each other to prevent a
sound attack from being established.
The pawn triangle in the center holds quite strongly-two
Earth pawns with one Water pawn at the point of the triangle.


```
Middle-Game and Endgame 163
```
But if the Earth Knight were to take the Fire Knight, the Air
pawn would have to take the Earth Knight, filling the center of
the triangle and pinning both the Earth and Water pawns,
although it would be a floating pawn itself if the Air Bishop's
cover were removed.
By move 9, the Fire pawn sitting on 3d has been a handicap
to Water, preventing Knight and Bishop movement. Water tries
to give Air a choice of pieces to capture in order to save the
Earth Knight, but Air ignores the bait and makes the pin in the
triangle. This could cost Water, so Earth adds a threat with its
Bishop, although this puts the Bishop under threat also. Watch
how this struggle is played out.
By move 14, Fire is in trouble. If Fire moves PZc, a check-
mate follows in two moves. The only other piece that can be
moved is the Rook, making way for the King. Water and Earth
are safe, and Air is poorly positioned. Up to this point, Fire and
Air have not played well. Water, however, has nowhere to move
while waiting for Earth to remove the Fire Queen, which is
playing a key role, so Water must make a miscellaneous move
with the King; any other move would put Water in jeopardy.
At this point, Water and Earth are up by one piece and
one pawn.
All players made mistakes in this game, the greatest of
which was failing to watch their backs. In any game where
allies concentrate too much on one opponent, there is a danger
that the other opponent will sneak up from behind. In move 15,
if Fire had counterattacked by capturing the Earth Bishop with
its pawn, a quick Fire King capture would have followed: both
the Earth and Water Rooks would have been lined up together
with the Water Knight on the Fire pawn on lc. Move 16 sees the
Fire King play as an aggressor, preventing Water and Earth
from moving in.
By move 18 in example l(a), Earth and Water are finding a
Fire King capture difficult. Pawns are cleverly used by all play-
ers to hold an advantage. In move 19, Air overlooked a King
fork and could lose a Knight. The Water Knight moved out to
put some pressure on Air, since Air was hindering effective


164 Part II-Book of Air

Earth moves. Fire and Air turn the attack in their favor on
moves 22 and 23. However, this turns again against Air, who
miscalculated his or her attack on the Earth King and left itself
with a King fork, as shown in figure 40.
However, the Fire Rook comes to the rescue, again changing
the advantage. This is an example of how a turn of events can
occur in this game, with the input from two additional players.
But the struggle does not end at move 23, for endgame play
makes more free squares available for maneuvering and leaves
all players working for an advantage. Having more free squares
to choose from can make players careless, whereas in fact which
square you position each piece on can be crucial to the success
of your game.
Another point to note here is the Earth Queen, which has not
moved once in the whole game, yet even unmoved plays a key
defensive role for Earth in the endgame. The Rooks play a strong


```
Middle-Game and Endgame 165
```
role in the endgame providing you can keep them free from
being pinned in, as the Water Rook was for most of this game.
Earth's move in move 27 might have been Q3c to protect the
Earth King and also threaten the Air Rook, but Earth moved its
King instead. In move 28, Earth exchanges a pawn for another
Rook, giving Earth and Water a further advantage. Move 29
brings a Knight fork to the Fire Knight and Air Rook. Air choos-
es to save its Rook, but move 30 brings the newly exchanged
Earth Rook into play, combining with the Water Rook to threat-
en the Air Rook, which has nowhere to go. Air and Fire resign.
In example l(b), given below, in move 17, Earth moves BF3c
instead of RF2c, and Fire retaliates with PxB, but Earth and
Water still win because Fire and Air erred early in the game
and lost too many pieces. However, in the next few moves, Air
certainly tries hard to change the odds.

Example l(b)

```
E
BF3c
RF3cxP+
RF2c+
Q3a
Klb
P2c
K2a
P2d+
RE3b
R4bxR
```
```
F
PxB
K2b
K3b
K4b
K3b
K4a
PW3dxP
KE2d
Withdraws
Air Retires
```
```
W
RF lcxP
Kla
RFlaxR
RW3a
NFlc+
P3d
K2b
R2dxP
Rld+
```
```
A
R3b+
NA4b
Nwlc
Plc
RE4c
RE4b+
NA4b
N2c
Klb
```
```
On move 23, Fire attempts to create a bare King by sacrific-
ing its last pawn. In so doing, Fire can withdraw and leave its
moves to Air, who has more pieces in play, thereby giving Air an
advantage. Earth anticipates this and pulls its Rook away from
the Fire angle in move 25 to reinforce its own forces. With ally
cooperation, Water and Earth double-team Air. This does not
give Air a chance to get going with its extra moves received from
```

```
166 Part 11-Book of Air
```
```
Fire, and the Air Rook is captured. Air retires, conceding defeat.
Once the Rook is captured, the odds are heavily against it; for
example, one Knight against two Rooks, a Knight and a Queen.
```
Example 2
Fire Board, Fire of Fire setting, playing widdershins.

```
F
P2c
B2b
Q4c?
Plc
R3a
PxB
P2d
N2c
PW4b?
Pld
BA3cxN
BA2b
RW2cxQ
RW4c?
BxQ
K2b
NW4a+
NW3c+
```
```
Example 2(a)
F
18 -
19 PxB
20 K3b
21 K4bxP
22 NxWK
23 K4c
24 NW3c
25 KE4d
```
```
W
P3c
N3b
P4c
BF4cxQ
R3a
N2d
P4d
Q2c
R3b
NxB
PA4d
P3d*
K2a
P2c
PxB
K2b
K2a
Kla
```
-
R2b
RlbxN
KxR
Captured;
Frozen
Pieces

```
A
P2c
B2b
BF3c
R3a
P3c
R4a
P3d
N3b
BA3c
P4c
Plc
Pld
RWld
RA4a
Nlc
NE4b
NA3cxP
NW2d ...
```
-
NW lbxP
RxR+
PE4a
P2d
PE4b
Klb
Q2c


```
Middle-Game and Endgame 167
```
```
F W A E
26 KE4cxP PE3a NF4c+
27 KA2d PE3b RF2c
28 NF4d QE4b RF2b
29 NE3c PE2b+ Resigns
```
See commentary on moves 1-6 in opening play example
3(a), Fire of Fire, page 140.
After move 6, all pieces have reached middle-game play.
Water immediately attacks with its Knight, but it is not a move
that has much follow-through, since Air just casually moves its
Rook back to 4a. Earth and Fire concentrate on positioning
their pieces. Fire and Air forces advance on move 7. Water
ignores Fire's threat, but Earth must retreat. Earth looks bot-
tled up and could lose its Rook if it does not move fast. Water is
prevented from moving to PA4d, which would block the Air
Bishop, because of the threat to the Water Rook by a Fire pawn
advance in move 9. However, due to the Air Bishop's threat to
the Earth Rook, the Water Knight must capture the Air Bishop
in move 10. Fire has underestimated the Water Rook's move
and now cannot move an advanced pawn to capture a Water
pawn because it will expose the Fire Knight. In move 9, Fire
should have gone NW4c instead of PW4b, as this would have
enabled it to carry through its Earth Rook capture.
Air and Fire have a double play in their moves; however, a
simple EP2c would have prevented the Air Rook from storming
across the board after the BishopDJightIpawn exchange to line
up the Earth King's pawn. Air therefore chooses not to capture
the Water Knight with its pawn, causing a doubled pawn, and
leaves the capture to the Fire Bishop. In the meantime, Earth
makes an opening for its Rook. On move 11, Water links its out-
side pawn up with an Earth pawn to block the Fire Bishop's line
of movement, and so the Fire Bishop is threatened in move 12.
Air uses its Queen very well by positioning its pawns so that
the Queen covers two back pawns by a fork. WP3d was a bad
move because it immediately exposed the Water Queen. The
Queen was protected only by Plb, which could not be moved
because it would expose the Water King to the Air Rook. So


```
168
```
```
Air
```
```
Part II-Book of Air
```
```
Water
```
```
Earth Fire
```
always remember not to place additional pressure on a pinned
piece or pawn. The Water Knight must go to 2a; otherwise it
would give Fire time to advance its Knight.
In move 13, Earth's move proves crucial to Water. Was Q4a
right? By move 14, the tables have turned. Both the Fire and
Air Rooks must run, and the Air King is in check. The Fire
Bishop must capture the Earth Queen. The Water pawn then
captures the Fire Bishop, leaving a Water pawn strategically
placed, preventing the move AN2d and limiting the Air King's
escape squares. Fire could have hindered this earlier by moving
its Rook to F3c, but moving F3c after EN2d is foolish. Water is
limited by move 16; any move could be costly. Fire is also limit-
ed, so move 17 could also be costly for Fire. However, Fire sees
the opportunity to check Water, thereby hindering any forward


```
Middle-Game and Endgame
```
```
Air
```
```
169
```
```
Water
```
Earth Fire

pawn movement. The Air Knight maneuvers, capturing a Water
pawn on the way, so that three pieces are eventually threaten-
ing the pinned Water pawn that protects the Water King.
Earth has to sacrifice a Bishop to buy time for Water, then
tries to check the Fire King. This enables the Water King to cap-
ture the Air Rook (Kings can move into check if already in
check) and the advantage is again turned, costing Air and Fire
both Rooks. But is the cost worth it for the loss of the Water
King? With the King's capture, Water is out of the game, and all
Water pieces still standing on the board remain there as frozen
pieces. Earth moves to force the Fire King into a drawn game,
because if only two players were playing, Air would not get
Fire's moves and the Fire King would remain on the board as a
frozen piece. However, Fire is a bit too clever to lose its last
piece and uses its King aggressively.


(^1 70) Part 11-Book of Air
Moves 24-29 see Fire and Air very carefully closing ranks
on the Earth King. If Earth had concentrated more on the Fire
Knight and capturing Air pawns, rather than making futile
checks to the Fire King, there might have been a difference in
the endgame. But with Air having a full complement of pawns
advancing on the Earth King, a victory is inevitable. If Earth
had brought its Rook and Knight back to its King's defense and
advanced the pawns to the other side of the board for exchange,
the game could have been made difficult for Air and Fire.
Example 2b
If Earth moves NF3a in move 18 instead of BW4b.
F

-
NWlbxP
RW 2cxP?
K3b
K2a
PW3b
PW2b
K2b
PW lb#
QW3b
Klb
QF2d
QF4bxP+
K2cxN
RF3c
RE3c+
RE4cxP
RE3c
Klc
RE lcxP+
RE2c
RE3c+
RF4c
PW4a

W A

- -
RxN RxR+
KlbxAR NxWK++
Captured NW2d
NW4c
PE4a
P2d
NxB
PE4b
PE3a
Q2c
P4d
PF4d
PF2a
PE la
PE3b
QE4b
Klb
PE2b
K2c
QE2dxP?
QE4b
K2d
QMc

```
E
```
.. .NF3a
B2d
RF2c+
RFlc
K2b
Klc
BF4c+
RxN
NF2c?
P2d
K2c
Plc
RxQ+
RW4d
RW4a
Kld
RW la+A
RW lb+F
RW2b+A
KF4b
K3d
KF4d
KA4d
Retires


```
Middle-Game and Endgame 171
```
Instead of sacrificing the Earth Bishop, the Earth Knight
moves forward and limits the Fire King's free squares. Fire
ignores this and follows through on the attack on Water. The
Water Rook captures the Fire Knight, and the Air Rook follows
through, capturing the Water Rook and checking the Water
King. The Earth Bishop makes way for the Earth Rook. Fire
must be careful here because Earth looks as if it will be able to
buy more time, as seen in move 20, where Water moves into
check and exercises Rule 8.6. Fire is unable to capture the
Water King because its own King will be in check on the next
move. This would have given the Water King time, but because
of the positions of the Fire pawns, the Water King will still have
been lost. The Water King therefore captures a Rook on the way
out to lessen the odds against Earth. The remaining Water
pawn becomes a frozen piece.
Fire did not watch its back while in the heat ofbattle, and in
move 22 it looks as if Fire will lose a pawn--or even its King,
unless it moves K2a, which it does. The Air Knight then comes
to the rescue and forks a Fire pawn and the F4c square to pre-
vent an Earth Bishop check. The Earth King moves to a safer
position pending an Air pawn advance.
By move 24, Earth's pieces are limited, so Earth checks with
its Bishop in the hope that the Air Knight will retaliate, thus
effecting an exchange. If the Air Knight does not respond, the
Earth King will be lost.
In move 25 (see fig. 43 on next page), the Earth Rook cap-
tures the Air Knight (which captured the Earth Bishop) instead
of the capture being made by the Earth Knight. Otherwise, the
Earth Rook would be vulnerable to the Fire King. Move 26 pro-
motes a Fire pawn to a Queen (two pawns were left, so the
Queen's pawn must be exchanged for a Queen).
Earth attempts to position the King so as to capture an
advancing Air pawn in order to prevent its promotion. As no
pawn promotion can occur until one of the four Air pawns has
been lost, Air must first tempt Earth into capturing a pawn.
Earth ignores this, but this may be a mistake. By move 30, Fire
has built up pressure on the Earth pawn on F4b. The exchange
that could follow would decide the game in Fire and Air's favor


```
1 72
```
```
Air
```
```
Part II-Book of Air
```
```
Water
```
```
Earth Fire
FIGURE 43-MOVE 25, EXAMPLE 2(~), EARTH TO MOVE
```
if Earth retaliates. Air also adds a pawn threat to the Earth
Rook, which also forces Earth's decision.
Earth lost an opportunity in move 26 to capture the Fire
Queen: it could have checked the Fire King with its Rook
instead of moving the Knight. On move 31, the Fire King cap-
tures the Earth Knight. The forces are too great for Earth now,
so it is only a matter of time. The Fire Rook moves across the
board to close in on the Earth King. In move 32, an Air pawn
reaches the opposite side of the board but cannot be exchanged
because four pawns are still on the board. Earth attempts to
move its Rook out and attack the Air King.
As you will have seen in this example, pawn moves in the
endgame can be effective. In move 32, the Fire Rook can either
make or break the game. By move 40, Earth is still trying to


```
Middle-Game and Endgame 1 73
```
```
Air Water
```
```
Earth Fire
```
```
gain a foothold, with Fire and Air hard in the chase. Earth finds
cover from the Air pawns. With very few moves available to Fire
in move 41, Fire pushes its pawn forward. After the Air Queen
moves behind its King to prevent an Earth Rook check, Earth
retires, seeing no way to beat Fire and Air.
```
Example 3
Fire Board, Air of Fire setting, playing widdershins.

```
This is an example of Rule 11.3, of how a player can capture
his ally's King (see move 3) to save the opening game, thereby
being in control of the allied pieces and only having to worry
about defending one King. If the King had not been captured in
this way, the opponent would have captured the Air King and
thus frozen all Air pieces at the beginning of the game.
```

174 Part II-Book of Air

```
F
P2c
N4c
BA2bxK
P3c
QxN
P3d
PxP
R2c
P4c
Plc
K2b
P4d
PW4c
Pld
Klc
RE 3bxP
RF2c
PW3c
RE3c+
RE3b+
RE3c+
RE4cxP
K2b?
PW4d
RE4d+
Klb?
PW4a
Klc
Retires
```
```
W
Q2c
QA4bxP
QxB
N4c
NxQ
PxP
P3c
NA4d
NW2d
R4a
RA3d
P2c
P3d
B2b
RA3bxP
RA3a
NA3c
B lc
NE4bxP*
RA3c?
RA2c
K2b
K3b
K2a
NA3c
NxFR
NF3c+
RE4b
```
```
A
P2c
K2b
BxQ
BxQ
Plc
Q4c
Rla
BW3d
P2d
PA4b?
Rlb
BFBd?
BF3c
Rla
BW4a
Rlb
R2b
QxB
R2d
BEld
RF4a+
RW4c
RW4b+
RFBd?
RF3b
RF2d
RF2c
RxN
```
```
E
QAlc+
N4c
QA3axN
NxN
P2c
P4c
B3c
B2d
Plc
Pld
RAld
K2b
BW3a
Klc
P2d
PF4a
RAlcxP
BxQ
K2b
Klc
KxB
RE3a+
BW3a
PF4b
PF3a+
KF4a
R4a
PxR
```
A fast-moving game with move 3 displaying an ally King
capture and the opponents' Queen sacrifices to obtain two more
pieces of value. By move 5, Air and Fire have lost their Knights,
Earth and Water being left with one. Earth and Water are one
piece and a pawn up. Fire pushes forward with its pawns to
open up its Rook line and moves its Air forces forward. The


```
Middle-Game and Endgame 1 75
```
```
Air Water
```
```
Earth Fire
```
maneuver of Fire locks the Water Bishop in, as a P2c move
would eventually expose the Water King's protecting pawn to
two Rooks. By move 8, the pace has not slowed down. The Water
Knight is forced away from F3c and chooses square A4d to pro-
tect the Earth Bishop and attack the Air pawn on 4b. However,
Air lines itself up for a Water King attack. If the Water King
goes to 2a, Air's next move must be BWlbxP+. If Water moves
Plc, the Air Queen will capture a pawn: WPxQ ARxP+ WK2a
ABWlb+. If Water moves PZc, Air will move QWlc+; the Water
King must then move to Zb, and then the Air Bishop to W4c+. If
the Water Rook moves to 3b, then Air may take the Rook with
its Bishop, but to obtain an actual King capture quickly, the
Fire Rook must capture the Water Rook. Water chooses to move
its Knight to 2d, covering Plb. Is the Water Bishop able to move


```
176 Part II-Book of Air
```
from the corner square? Not so. Such a move will open the line
up to the Fire Rook, since the Air Bishop will only capture the
pawn knowing Plc cannot move to expose the Water King.
By move 10, Water is so well placed it does not know where to
move. Therefore, the only free piece is moved, the Rook, lining it
up with the Water Knight. The advancing Air pawn should have
captured the Earth pawn in move 9, which would have opened up
Earth's lines. By move 15, Air lets its P3b be captured in order to
place its Rook on the top rank again. The Air Bishop moves in.
Meanwhile, Earth sneaks up behind Fire. The Fire Rook takes
the opportunity to capture a loose Earth pawn. Since the Water
defense is a little too strong, Fire and Air change their concentra-
tion from Water to Earth in move 17 and move to the attack.
As you will see, between move 17 and 21 there has been a
shuffle as to who has the advantage. Fire and Air come on
strong, but Water and Earth always seem to find a way out. In
move 21, Water exercises the rule that, once in check, a King
can move into check if it is likely to help its game. In this case,
it does, because Earth checks the Fire King and holds up a Fire
move follow-through to capture the Water King. This temporar-
ily saves the Water King, but the pressure is kept up on it. Fire
erred in moving its King back.
In move 24, the Earth pawn pushes forward; it could be
detrimental to Fire. Fire could try once again to attack WPlb,
but a simple Plc would counteract that with an Earth Bishop
cover. With only one Air piece left, the Air Rook must move even
if it is in a good position. Thus, with fewer active pieces than
Water and Earth, Fire and Air are finding a difficult time of it,
although they are doing very well to keep up the attack. The tide
turns, however, and the Water Knight threatens the Fire Rook
at the same time as the Earth Rook delivers check to the Fire
King. The Fire Rook is lost. The careful move forward of Earth
pawns eventually trapped the Fire King. After a few more
moves, Fire retires, seeing the situation as hopeless. In move 19,
the Water Knight move could have been fatal to the Earth if the
Air Rook had taken the Knight, thus completely trapping the
Earth King and leaving Water in a hopeless position.


```
Middle-Game and Endgame 177
```
If Fire had played Fire and Air forces differently in this
game and not carelessly lost so many pieces, the game would
have gone a much different way. Try this one out for yourself.

Example 4
Air Board, Earth of Air setting, playing deosil, two players
operating pieces.

```
A
P3c
P4c
B3b
Nlc
QW3d
QF2d
QxB
NE4b
P4d
Plc
BF3d
NE3dxP+
P2c
BxQ
Pld
BW4b
PE4a
Rld
PE3a
RE4a
PE4d
BxQ
K2a
RAld
K3b
R2d
RA2axP
KXR
```
```
W
P3c
B3b
Nlc
NA4b
B2c?
B3d?
Plc
Pld
Qlc
P4c
PA4a
PA3a
QA4c
QA2cxP
P2c
K2b
QE4dxP
QF3bxN
QFld
QW3a
QF3d
P2d
Rlb
K2c
P4d
PA2a
RxR
PA4b
```
```
F
P3c
P4c
Qlc
B3b
Q W4c
QA4bxN
PE4dxP
QA2d
B4c
Nlc
QE3dxP
BE lcxP+
R2a
NF3b
Plc
RE lb+
RF4a
K2a
REld+
RE lc
Kla
Klb
R2a
P2c
R2b+
RXR
Pld
P2d
```
```
E
P3c
B3b
P4c
P3d?
N3c
P4d
BW3dxQ
P2c
K2b
Plc*
PxQ*
K3b
QxB
R2a
NF4b
K2c
NF2c+
KxAN
KF4b
NW4a
KF3b
NXB
BE3b
NE3d
KF3a
BxR
NE4b
BW3d
```

```
Part 11-Book of Air
```
```
A
K3b
PxP
K2c
K2d
PE3d
PE2d
PE2a
KE4a?
KE4b
KA3d
KE4b
KE3b
KE2b
Resign
```
```
F
Klc
P3d
PW4c
PW4a
Kld
PW4b
PW3c+
PW2c
PWlc#
QW3c+
QWlc
PW3a
Resign
```
```
E
KF3b
BxP
BE3b
NA4d
KF3c
KF3d
BxP
NF4c
B W2c
KW4c
BWld
KW3b
```
-

All players chose a P3c opening to provide an opening for
their Bishops. By moves 5 and 6, the Fire and Air Queens put
some pressure on Water. Water loses its Knight with no
exchange and would lose its Bishop the same way if Earth did
not move P4d. Air must capture the Water Bishop; otherwise
the Water Bishop will capture the Queen and cause Fire to have
a doubled pawn when Fire counterattacks. This combination of
moves shows how the Queens, when working together, become
an effective attacking force. Here Fire and Air obtain a Bishop,
Knight and pawn for the exchange of a Queen. Now Earth and
Water must not recklessly make any exchanges except to gain
pieces. If Water had moved Nlc instead of B3d in move 6, or Plc
instead of B2c, Water would have come out of the combination
of moves a lot happier.
On moves 9 to 10, all sides jostle for position and advance
their pieces and pawns. Air keeps overlooking a floating Water
pawn on Wld. Move 11 sees a buildup on Earth by Fire and
Air, drawing towards a check. Water and Earth's moves at this
point could be crucial to Earth's game, but Earth keeps miss-
ing the obvious. WP4d would only evoke a combination that
would endanger the Water King, so Water decides to continue


```
Middle-Game and Endgame 1 79
```
its advance on Air. Fire needs one more piece on EPlc to make
an effective attack, but its Queen is trapped, which is a hand-
icap. Fire sacrifices its Queen to open up Earth's pawns. Earth
takes the bait.
On move 12, the Air Knight, which is seen to be hanging,
checks the Earth King while taking a pawn and ends up posi-
tioned so that it can capture the pinned Earth pawn on lc. That
is all Fire needs to commence its attack on Earth. Meanwhile,
Water sneaks up on Air, limiting Air's King and Rook moves. By
moves 14 and 15, the Fire Knight links in with the Air Knight,
but the King capture is not easy. Move 15 finds Fire with no
attack follow-through, so Fire takes the opportunity to
strengthen its own King defense. Air turns its attention back to
Water, a weak pawn, plus opening up the Fire Rook line. The
Water King moves forward to protect its pawn. The Earth
Knight prepares for a possible fork by the Fire Rook and King.
These are examples of how players can use free moves to
establish their defenses and deal with more than one opponent
at once, which can be essential. Fire's hanging pawn on E4d is
too difficult to protect, so Fire ignores its opponent's threat. This
was a mistake, as becomes evident in moves 17-18. Fire and Air
lose both Knights. As you can see, players must look forward to
the possible repercussions of their own combinations.
The Fire King is unable to move to any square, but since the
Rook is still in play, no stalemate occurs. Air forces the Water
Queen off the Fld square, opening up further movement for the
Fire King. At this stage, Water and Earth have regained their
losses and are up two pieces, so Fire and Air cannot afford the
loss of a piece.
By move 21, the Earth King is maneuvered across the board
to get into the protection of Water's ranks, but first it must
move through Fire. To have gone diagonally across the board
would have left the King vulnerable. With respect to Rooks and
opponent Kings, it is sometimes better to get up close to them in
order to outsmart them. Water and Earth also set up a combi-
nation of moves that capture the Air Bishop with the sacrifice of
the Water Queen. In endgame play, a Queen has little value


```
180
```
```
Air
```
```
Part II-Book of Air
```
```
Water
```
```
Earth Fire
```
when it is the only one left. If the Air Bishop ignored the bait,
the Water King would move forward and capture the Bishop
without an exchange.
On move 24, Fire foils the Earth and Water move on P2b. If
Fire's move on move 25 is P3d, the pawn could be taken by the
Earth King, resulting in a discovered check to the Fire King.
However, the Earth King can still move to 3c to enable the dis-
covered check. Then, in Earth's following move, it would move
NF3b+, and so on. But Fire instead chooses to check the Earth
King with a fork to the Earth Rook, thereby capturing the
Earth Rook even though it is covered by the Earth Bishop. Air
brings its Rook forward and likewise exchanges a Rook for a
Rook. It appears that Fire and Air are gambling that their supe-
rior number of pawns still on the board will change the odds in


```
Middle-Game and Endgame 181
```
```
Air Water
```
```
Earth Fire
```
the endgame. However, the Earth Bishop and Earth Knight
work very hard to change those odds. The Earth Knight is
placed in a quadruple fork so that the Air pawns cannot move
without being captured and the Water pawn is protected from
the Air King. The Earth King would have been better off to
move to 3c instead of 3a in move 25, capturing a Fire pawn in
the process.
The Air Knight moves to chase the Earth Knight and the
Earth King chases behind the Fire pawns. The Water King
stays close to its back pawn. At this stage, the placement of
each piece and pawn could win or lose the game, so players
must not get careless. The Fire pawns and King are moving
along in good formation. The Air King makes a futile attempt to
capture the Earth Knight, but then gets the opportunity to cap-


```
182 Part 11-Book of Air
```
ture a Water pawn and threaten the Earth Knight-but it
ignores this in move 36.
Air sacrifices a pawn to get a privileged pawn, but Water
beats Air to a pawn promotion and obtains a Knight. The Earth
King makes it very difficult for the Fire King to keep covering
its pawns. The Earth Knight covers the square that the Air
pawn must move to. Fire promotes a pawn to a Queen, which in
move 38 tries to force the Earth King back. But the Earth King
moves forward and the Earth Bishop lines up with square W4a
to prevent the Fire King from moving forward with its pawns.
The Air King does not seem to know where he is going, result-
ing in wasted moves. Remember, try to make every move count.
The Earth Knight, Water Knight and Earth Bishop posi-
tions block the Air King from moving toward its pawn or the
Fire pieces. By move 38, Earth must move, and in doing so may
give Fire time to obtain a promoted pawn. Earth moves wisely
and traps Fire with the Earth King. On move 41, the Water
pawn finally makes a promotion to a Queen. The odds seem too
great for Air and Fire now, so they resign.
The Earth King was used very well in halting Fire in its
march. This is an example of how effective the Kings can be if
used carefully.


Part I11

Book of Water

Divination



Enochian Chess

Divination

Introduction

I

fyou are new to the concept of the esoteric sciences, you
may be saying, "What is divination?" In simple terms, div-
ination is looking in a probable direction and telling past,
present or future happenings andlor results of that direc-
tion. Divination is generally event-oriented; however, it also
has a person-oriented aspect. This approach gives an idea of
emotional or psychological responses likely to take place in
response to a relationship or event. It can describe people and
events quite clearly at times, but the manner in which it
describes them depends on the method of divination used and
the interpretation of the diviner based on his or her sphere of
experience.
Your next question may be, "How can it see into the future,
or how does it work?" In answer to this I can only say, "It just
does," as no fully adequate technical explanation has yet been


```
186 Part 111-Book of Water
```
found.' Others may say, "it taps into the universal current of
what is and what is to be," but how can functions that leave
room for pure chance tell the truth? The answer to this is that
they don't. They only show a probable course as seen at the
point of divination that the querent has previously/currently
placed him or herself in. This course is likely to continue in that
direction until some conscious interference, either by the quer-
ent or by some unexpected, unknown, outside force, changes it.
In the course of a day, an individual may change his or her
probable direction several times if under stress to do so. If the
external stress is greater than the elements underlying the
impetus of the course taken, or the individual's Will, he or she
will change direction. If the stress is not greater but is neverthe-
less enough to have an influence, direction still may be changed,
showing a new probability, but with the same ultimate result.
The difference is the manner in which the result is obtained.
I think current-day quantum physics is beginning to explain
the concepts of divination and invisible energies which gurus,
adepts, occultists, diviners, etc., have used and understood for
centuries. In fact, there will always be people who will say, "Div-
ination does not work; its all superstition," or, in great disbelief,
'You don't believe in that, do you?" It would be quite a mind-
blowing shock to these people to find out that this world of mys-
ticism and divination is already just beginning to be explained
by physicists through quantum mechanics. In fact, it might be a
shock to some of the physicists themselves.
Quantum mechanics deals with making allowances for prob-
abilities and the prediction of probabilities within the confines of
an experiment. Quantum mechanics has not yet advanced to the
stage of being able to actually predict what will happen. It will
predict only the probable result, or potential.2 The main problem

1. In his study of the subject, which he termed "synchronicity," Carl Jung con-
sidered that divination was formed by restricting nature and making it pro-
duce an answer through the effort of the diviner.
2. A tendency for something-a quantum version of the Aristotelian philo-
sophical concept of potentia.


```
Enochian Chess Divination 187
```
may be that they are still trying to compartmentalize and mea-
sure from a three-dimensional view something that is multidi-
mensional. However, if everything can be totally and accurately
predicted as if there were one possible course and one course
only, which Newtonian physics would lead us to believe, the
true destiny of the world would have been well mapped out by
now. I do not believe that this is so. Divination can only predict
what will happen along a probable course of events, and that
probable course is only one among many probabilities.
New physics tells us that the world may not be what it
appears to be, and that it is much more than perceived. Ah! At
last we are getting some sense out of our scientists! That's what
the mystics have been trying to say for centuries. This is the
same advice I must give to those using Enochian chess for divin-
ing. Enochian chess is a multidimensional system, and trying to
perceive the full story from any combination of moves or an entire
divination game is nearly impossible, because it has to be trans-
lated into our three-dimensional perceptions. Be happy with peel-
ing one or two layers of this onion. It should yield enough
information to provide a deep understanding of any situation.
One other word of advice: Do not take everything literally.
After all, any form of divination can only show a probable
course with a probable or potential result. If you want to view
the other probabilities, just divine, divine and divine again. All
you have to do is rephrase your question each time, adding ,"if I
did this" or "if I took this route" etc.
Throughout most Orders, papers will be found that refer to '
various aspects of divination work ranging from Tarot cards to
the I Ching (e.g., as in Aleister Crowley's "A.'.A.'."). All these
methods are just as effective as the Enochian chess game as far
as the end results are concerned. The divination game of
Enochian chess can, however, give a full working as to how an
answer to a question stands in the scheme of things. It provides
-very much like astrology-an insight into outside and inter-
nal influences, and the particular nature of such. But addition-
ally it shows the complex movements of archetypes and their
interactions with each other.


```
Part 111-Book of Water
```
Enochian chess divination has been found to be a far-reach-
ing system that requires that the expertise of the diviner must
include knowledge of the Tarot, geomancy, esoteric psychology,
the elements and astrology. The Enochian system itself reaches
into the depths of the Universe, and this is what the diviner
must do. One assimilates an enormous amount of data into the
psyche during divination play-an amount of which only a por-
tion can be tapped in the final analysis, because a great deal
takes place with the players on the unconscious as well as the
conscious level. This is of course in essence the pattern of all
magical works: to receive the impetus, then act it out, sending
the original emanation back up through the planes to its source.
MacGregor Mathers, in his papers on Enochian chess, tried
to show us this when he used the Zodiac and the elements
applied to the chess squares in divination matters. I have done
the same, and I hope the following summarized information will
provide a suitable guideline from which you can work.
The divination game of Enochian chess, as devised by Math-
ers and Westcott, was played in such a way that the first player
was the querent and considered the Prime Mover, or the owner
of the Ptah piece. This Prime Mover chose the element board for
the divination game, then the angle of the board helshe was to
operate, and finally the square of that angle where the Ptah
piece was to be placed to signify the Ptah Square. To make such
a choice, the Prime Mover had to understand the symbols and
esoteric meanings of the Enochian Tablets so as to choose an
Enochian pyramid square (chess square) that had associations
with the actual question being divined. The answer to the ques-
tion was then determined through chess play. Eliphas Levi says
in his Key to the Mysteries:

```
The game of chess, attributed to Palamedes, has no other ori-
gin than the Tarot, and one finds there the same combinations
and the same symbols; the king, the queen, the knight, the sol-
dier, the fool, the tower, and houses representing numbers. In
old times, chess-players sought upon their chess-board the
solution of philosophical and religious problems, and argued
```

```
Enochian Chess Divination 189
```
```
silently with each other in manaeuvring the hieroglyphic char-
acters across the numbers. Our vulgar game of goose, revived
from the old Grecian game, and also attributed to Palamedes,
is nothing but a chess-board with motionless figures and num-
bers movable by means of dice.
```
Whether or not the Tarot was the origin of chess is beside
the point, but the fact is that chess has been used for divination
in one form or another since its inception from Chaturanga. The
Tarot of course is well noted for its divinatory process, and it is
almost inevitable that the chess pieces and the Tarot would be
eventually linked together in one form or another. However,
within the framework of the Golden Dawn, it was done with
real style. When all of this is mixed with an astrological frame-
work, the tools to deciphering the outcome of the divinatory
game are excellent.
The players' moves were decided by the throw of a die,
which in turn determined which piece would be moved. Once a
player had established which piece was to be moved, the player
then had free choice as to how and where it was moved. Each
player followed in rotation, deosil, until the Prime Mover was
next to move. This was considered one round of the game. Play
continued (sometimes incorporating many rounds of the game)
until such time as the querent's King had reached the Ptah
Square and remained there for one round of the game, or was
captured.
The original Y manuscripts stated that the dice number
attributions to the chess pieces were governed by the "powers of
the squares on the Sephirothic Crosses." Therefore, when play-
ing different piece settings, the numeric attributions of the
chess pieces would change. For example, in the Air of Air set-
ting, a throw of 4 moves a castle, a 2 moves a Knight, a 3 moves
a Queen and a 5 moves a Bishop. In an Earth of Air setting, a 4
brings the Bishop into play, a 2 moves a Queen, a 3 moves a
Knight and 5 would bring a Castle into play. A throw of 1
always operates a King and a 6 any one of the pawns. Regardie,
however, reasoned in The Golden Dawn that it would be easier


```
190 Part III-Book of Water
```
to maintain one numeric attribution for the pieces in all set-
tings. He showed that Kether, being the Crown and the first
square of the Cross, should be 1 and associated with the King.
But as the King is blocked from moving in the early part of the
game, a pawn move would also be optional on a throw of 1.
A throw of 2 corresponded to Chokmah and the Knight, 3 to
Binah and the Bishop, 4 to Chesed and the Queen, 5 to Geburah
and the Rook and 6 to the pawns. Because of the convenience of
this method, I have included it in the following rules.
From my own experience, I have found that it is best for the
players to experience a divination game without rationalizing,
merely playing the game and recording the moves. The actual
analysis can be made after the game is played by re-enacting
the play from your record sheet. In this way the players are not
tempted to consciously influence the casting of the die, or actu-
al moves of the pieces, through knowledge of the actual effects
being shown by the game. For this reason, I do not have the
attributions of each square marked on my own chessboard. If
you play the game often enough, it is quite easy to identify each
square and its influence and understand on a more intuitive
level how the pieces are acting thereon. Intellectualizing can
occur after the divining forces have played out their story.
When I spoke to Regardie in his 1983 visit to New Zealand, I
had the opportunity of setting up my chess set. We discussed the
advantage of the unmarked squares versus the marked squares,
and he agreed with my approach. This concept also encourages
players to work a lot harder and results in their understanding
the system better, not only intellectually but psychically.
In the following text I have provided a fuller divinatory and
esoteric meaning to the chess pieces, including the Ptah piece,
but first the divination rules and method of play must be stud-
ied. Following the rules are guidelines as to choosing the Ptah
Square and methods by which one can analyze the results of div-
ination play, together with reference material that may aid your
analyses. However, although reference material is suggested, it
is assumed that you have some knowledge of astrology, Tarot,
geomancy etc., or have some form of reference to the same.


```
Enochian Chess Divination 191
```
Astrological symbols are a universal language whereby
much information can be understood through the use of a few
symbols. These astrological symbols have been used as glyphs
through which the Enochian system radiates in much the same
way as planets and signs radiate through the houses of an
astrological chart. But it must be remembered that Enochian
chess is not astrology; it merely uses the symbolic language of
astrology, by association, to describe vibrations and happenings
that arise on the chessboards during a divination game.
The same concept is also applied to the geomantic influence
in the squares. These represent the vibrations of the Earth and
must not be confused with the Zodiac. A geomantic vibration
penetrated or influenced in some way by a celestial energy caus-
es the geomantic energy to vibrate to a pitch that is in affinity
with the celestial energy. Neither governs the other; they are
only catalysts of each other.
With the expansive qualities being introduced to Enochian
chess, I feel that some comment should be made on the theory of
one of these concepts: four-dimensional Enochian chess. Over
the years, this theory has been discussed in relation to the
Enochian game. It must be considered that, on a game level,
there is nothing wrong with using the four boards at once. From
an esoteric concept, such as divination games, I would not rec-
ommend it. Firstly, in divination, nature is restricted (to a board)
so that it is virtually forced to produce an answer. By the use of
a single board, the utmost restriction is placed on the divination
game, where archetypes, as chess pieces, are restricted and thus
compelled to "cough up" the answers. It has been argued by some
that, in using the four boards, the scope of divination play is
increased, but this is not the case. First each elemental corner
can equally represent each board in microcosm, and the chess
pieces are the archetypal forms therein. Second, the accuracy of
the game is in doubt because the answer becomes more general.
The more restriction there is, the more accurate the answer.
Third, from the esoteric point of view, each Enochian board rep-
resents a different hierarchy or structure, and by blending them
to overlap in game play, confusion can occur. Four boards can be
used individually but not simultaneously.



Enochian Chess

Divination

Official Rules

```
Continuing from Official Rules (pages 87-100):
```
13. General game play rules 1 to 12.3 are acknowledged
as Official Divination Rules for game play unless
contradicted by the following
14. Querent

```
14.1 The querent is the player who requires a question to be
answered by the Enochian chess divination play. There
can only be one querent. The other three players assist
the querent in finding an answer to the question by
virtue of their roles as players.
14.2 The querent places the Ptah piece on a chosen square in
a chosen angle of a chosen elemental chessboard, which
```

```
194 Part ID-Book of Water
```
```
represents the question. (Guidelines on how to choose
the Ptah Square are found in the following chapter.)
```
```
14.3 The querent operates the chess pieces belonging to the
angle of the board on which the Ptah piece is placed.
14.4 The querent always starts the play; i.e., the querent is
the first player (Prime Mover).
```
15. The Ptah

```
15.1 The Ptah is an all-white chess piece used only in divina-
tion games. It has no other function than to signify the
square representing the querent's question.
15.2 The square upon which the Ptah piece is placed is called
the "Ptah Square."
15.3 The Ptah piece is not moved from the square throughout
the game, nor can it be attacked or captured.
15.4 The Ptah Square can be moved on or over by other pieces.
To all intents and purposes, the Ptah piece does not exist
except as a visible marker of the Ptah Square. Other
pieces can be placed on the square occupied by the Ptah.
```
16. Objective

```
16.1 During the course of the game, with the pieces to be
moved dictated by the throw of a die, the querent, with
the aid of his ally, must move his or her King to the Ptah
Square and stay there for one round of the game; i.e.,
until the querent's next turn to move.
16.2 The querent and ally are protectors of the Ptah Square.
16.3 The two players who are in opposition to the querent
and ally must attempt to cover the Ptah Square so that
the querent's King cannot safely attain it. In so doing,
the opposition creates as many obstacles as possible dur-
ing the normal course of play.
```

```
Enochian Chess Divination 195
```
17. Determining Moves

```
17.1 Each player's moves are decided by the throw of a die,
the highest number of the die determining the move.
(The die is numbered 1-6, one number on each flat sur-
face, and each number determines that a particular
chess piece is to be moved.)
17.2 If 1 is thrown, a King is moved. If the King cannot move
because all adjacent squares are occupied, a pawn is
moved instead.
If 2 is thrown, a Knight is moved.
If 3 is thrown, a Bishop is moved.
If 4 is thrown, a Queen is moved.
If 5 is thrown, a Rook is moved.
If 6 is thrown, a pawn is moved.
17.3 If a number is thrown for a piece that has no unoccupied
square to move to, that move is considered "No Move"
and is recorded as such or by a dash on the recording
sheet.
(a) A "No Move" does not allow a player to make a sec-
ond throw of the die in that turn. The player surren-
ders that turn and does not move any chess piece.
(b) A "No Move" also occurs when a number is thrown
that represents a chess piece that has previously
been captured.
17.4 If a number is thrown for a piece that has only an unsafe
square or squares to move to, that piece must neverthe-
less move. (An unsafe square is where a piece may be
under threat of capture. This is allowed, because the
oppositions' throw of the die may not determine that a
threatening piece will move.)
```

```
196 Part III-Book of Water
```
18. The King
    18.1 If the querent's King is captured, the ally can try to
       obtain an opposing King to effect an exchange, if the
       odds are sufficiently favorable.
    18.2 A King or any of its pieces can move while the King is in
       check, according to what is defined by the die throw.
    18.3 A King can move into check even if it is not already in
       check. This rule is in accordance with rule 17.4, and
       overrides rule 8.11.
    18.4 The King of the angle that the querent plays is the only
       King that must obtain the Ptah Square and attempt to
       stay there for one round of the game.
19. Outcome of the Game

```
19.1 If the querent's King obtains the Ptah Square and stays
there unchecked for one round of the game, the question
is then said to be successful; i.e., the answer is positive.
(a) If the King stays on the Ptah Square during an all-
out attack, the question is successful under strong
opposing conditions.
(b) If the querent's King is checked while on the Ptah
Square, the game must continue until the King can
remain on the Ptah Square, unchecked and uncap-
tured, for one round of the game, to obtain a success-
ful result.
19.2 If the querent's King does not attain the Ptah Square
either through being captured or by any other means,
the question is considered unsuccessful; i.e., the answer
is negative.
19.3 Whether the querent's King reaches the Ptah Square or
not, the game can still be analyzed by the movements of
the pieces over the board during game play. This gives
```

```
Enochian Chess Divination 197
```
```
the diviner an idea of the interacting forces concerning
the question, how it attains its outcome and what oppos-
es or supports it.
```
19.4 If both the querent's King and its ally King are captured,
the game is at an end.



Setting Up

Your Board

for a

Divination Game

##### T

he "Ptah Square" is a square on which the Ptah chess piece
sits during a divination game. This square represents a
question supplied by a querent (one of the players), which
is answered by the outcome of the Enochian chess divina-
tion game.
To set up your board for a divination game, a Ptah Square
must first be decided upon. This decision depends entirely on
the "nature" of the divination question. This "nature" can be
interpreted through the vibrational nature of the four elements,
Earth, Air, Water and Fire, and combinations thereof. This of
course is very convenient, because it coincides quite well with
the nature of the Enochian chessboards. One can in turn isolate
which elemental board is in affinity with the divinatory ques-
tion, then the angle of that board, the chess pieces with which
the querent must operate and finally a square upon which the
Ptah piece is placed.


200 Part III-Book of Water

Described below is an easy and concise method of choosing
your chessboard, angle, piece setting, and Ptah Square for your
divination game.

1. Choose the element board most in affinity with your ques-
    tion: Fire, Water, Air or Earth.
2. Choose the elemental angle of your element board that is
in affinity with your question. By now you will be looking
at an element within an element.
3. Choose the square in the angle of the element board
which was chosen in points 1 and 2 above by virtue of its
Zodiachouse influence.
4. Place your Ptah on the square chosen in point 3.
5. The game play setting in which your pieces will be placed
will be that of the angle and board chosen in points 1 and
2.

The following correspondences should provide suitable
guidelines for performing steps 1 to 5.

```
The Elemental Boards
Choosing the Board and Angle for the Ptah
```
Fire Board
The World of Atziluth-The Primal Creative Urge

To understand the nature of the Fire Board, you must understand
the Fire element, its actions and its spiritual and physical nature.
The Hebrew letter "Yod" in Tetragrammaton, is the first, the
initiator; therefore one could say that a characteristic of the
Fire element is the initiation of events, the beginning of mat-
ters. As heat and energy, the Fire Board is concerned with
drive, anything that requires action, sports, war, arguments,
sex, self-motivation, enthusiasm, excitability, the dynamic core
of psychic energy, inspiration, life in its spark or seed. It also


```
Setting Up Your Board for a Divination Game^201
```
```
shows expressions such as power, desires, strength, expression
of freedom, courage, meeting challenges, competition. The Fire
Board would relate to questions on a deep spiritual level.
```
Fire Angle of Fire Board-Atziluth of Atziluth
The pure essence of Fire. The first seed of matter, inspira-
tion and initiation. Catalyzing events. Pure heat, energy and
drive. New projects, matters of the spirit, to win, war, spiritual
love, power, authority. For matters of spiritual growth and new
experience.
Associated are the planet Mars, the Zodiacal sign of Aries,
the Fire element, the geomantic figure Puer, the Tarot card The
Emperor and the geomantic ruler Bartzabel.
Water Angle of Fire Board-Briah of Atziluth
An answer to a "true" dream may be formed from this angle.
It alludes to strong competitiveness, to win or gain, business
affairs on a hidden level, on questions of fortune but not finan-
cial, entertainment, performing arts, music, creative inspira-
tion, teaching, birth, the life force. On matters relating to
hidden talents, secrets, children of the Soul, creation, to exter-
nalize what is within.
Associated are the Sun, the Zodiacal sign Leo, the Watery
part of the Fire element, the geomantic figure Fortuna Major,
the Tarot card Strength and the geomantic ruler Sorath.

Air Angle of Fire Board-Yetzirah of Atziluth
Questions concerning religion in its divine essence, spiritual
gain and insight, travel and communication of mind and spirit,
absorbing, receiving, comprehending. Philosophy, higher teach-
ing, business communication, long distance communication, sci-
ence and technology in its pure form, space travel. World peace
concerns, political relationships between nations, and matters
that need to be received and absorbed clearly for success.
Associated are the planet Jupiter, the Zodiacal sign Sagit-
tarius, the Airy part of the Fire element, the geomantic figure
Acquisitio, the Tarot card Temperance and the geomantic ruler
Hismael.


```
202 Part 111-Book of Water
```
Earth Angle of Fire Board-Assiah of Atziluth
The threshold (to the Water element), going out, for endeav-
ors that you wish to flow spontaneously, for self-motivation in
creativity, on matters of personal identity, for the manifestation
of a nonmaterial project, religion in its mystical sense. For mat-
ters changing to another area of development, transformation,
upheaval-violent or otherwise, world events affecting the con-
sciousness of mankind individually or en masse, concerning
leaving something, Karma.
Associated are the planet Pluto, the element of Earth in
the Earthy part of Fire, the geomantic figure Cauda Draconis,
the Tarot card Judgment and the geomantic rulers Bartzabel
and Zazel.
Water Board
The World of Briah-The Creative World
The Hebrew letter "Heh" in Tetragrammaton refers to the
Mother, feminine in nature, the receiver from "Yod." In all
essence, representative of the great waters of the universe; the
astral body, Azoth.
The Water element is in tune with many nuances and sub-
tleties. The Water Board is representative of awareness of the
power of the unconscious mind, rules subconscious motivation,
the subliminal and an attunement with the deeper dimensions
of life. Although the Water element may be calm on the surface,
there may be storms brewing underneath.
This element corresponds to the gaining of consciousness
through a slow and sure realization of the Soul's deepest yearn-
ings. Subjects covered are emotions, relationships on emotional
levels, love, yearnings, healing, protection, organizations, any-
thing requiring creative expression or formation, spiritual
groups, psychic concerns.
Fire Angle of Water Board-Atziluth of Briah
Matters concerning people, groups, congregations, psychic
concerns, transformation, extremes in emotional concerns, spir-
itual love. The privacy of oneself and home, emotional and spir-


```
Setting Up Your Board for a Divination Game^203
```
```
itual nourishment. Evocation and invocation, ceremonial initia-
tion. Finding answers around difficulties, family concerns, and
clearing up confusing issues.
Associated are the Moon, the Zodiacal sign Cancer, the Fiery
part of the Water element, the geomantic figure Populus, the
Tarot card The Chariot and the geomantic ruler Chasmodai.
Water Angle of Water Board-Briah of Briah
Concerning matters of suffering, and where a sacrifice takes
place before the Soul can grow. Where relief from suffering is
needed. Answers provided to difficult times. Concerning death,
the afterlife. To find out the undercurrent of matters, the hid-
den, secret thoughts. Spiritual regeneration, the occult, the
power of the Spirit in the affairs of the World. Where conclu-
sions must be sought on matters above. Human rights. Very
emotional matters.
Associated are the planet Mars, the Zodiacal sign Scorpio,
the Water element, the geomantic figure Rubeus, the Tarot card
Death and the geomantic ruler Bartzabel.
```
Air Angle of Water Board-Yetzirah of Briah
Future matters where the outcome depends on logic and
reasoning guiding emotion. Expansion of the intellect and intu-
itive understanding, for inner awareness, to find the value of a
matter and to discover your enemies. Concerning one's psycho-
logical health. For sensitive matters, understanding others'
attitudes or reactions. Advanced medical science and meta-
physics, retreats. Locating the cause of matters. Travel over
water. Sources of misfortune, but generally joy, health and pre-
sent or future to come.
Associated are the planet Jupiter, the Zodiacal sign Pisces,
the Airy part of the Water element, the geomantic figure Laeti-
tia, the Tarot card The Moon and the geomantic ruler Hismael.
Earth Angle of Water Board-Assiah of Briah
The threshold to the Air element. For changes in decisions
and emotions. To find direction, for gain, greed, the power of the
unconscious mind. Concerning unconscious emotions driven by


204 Part 111-Book of Water

material need, the nourishing of the psyche for growth. To jour-
ney for personal (not material) gain on an emotional level.
Maintaining resources, insights to emotional burdens, and on
matters of security. Where matters are not what they seem.
Associated are the planet Neptune, the Earthy part of the
Water element, the geomantic figure Via, the Tarot card The
Hanged Man and the geomantic ruler Chasmodai.

Air Board
The World of Yetzirah-The Formative World

In Tetragrammaton the Hebrew letter "Vau" takes the cosmic
energy and actualizes it into intelligible form. Archetypal ideas
form, specialized in creative patterns which then become
expression. The element of Air is associated with breath, life
prana. Its realm is of archetypal ideas behind the veil of the
physical world. Energy is focused on specific ideas that are
materialized in the Earth element. Creation is brought forward
into idea. This element emphasizes theory, logic, abstract
thoughts, matters of the mind, expression of art, studies, writ-
ing, publishing, travel, sickness, death, communication on tan-
gible levels, matters of trouble.

Fire Angle of Air Board-Atziluth of Yetzirah
The harmonizing of polarities is concerned here with matters
that need balance or impartiality. Matters concerning Will and
effort. Putting desires into constructive thought and seeing the
outcome thereof. Beginning of ideas, contracts, diplomats and
intermediaries, combustible situations. Sudden trips, intensive
communication. This angle is good in demands relating to
women/debauchery. Divorces, lawsuits and public disputes.
Associated are the planet Venus, the Zodiacal sign Libra,
the Fiery part of the Air element, the geomantic figure Puella,
the Tarot card Justice and the geomantic ruler Kedemel.

Water Angle of Air Board-Briah of Yetzirah
This angle alludes to matters of socialism, societies, rebel-
lions, disputes, reformation, the shedding of the old for the new.
Where reason rules emotion. Where control is required. Some-


```
Setting Up Your Board for a Divination Game^205
```
```
times concerning death, sadness and grief, condemnation, per-
version. Stormy situations. From another perspective this angle
depicts fortifying international friendships. Friends, compan-
ions, aeronautics, politics, service.
Associated are the planet Saturn, the Zodiacal sign Aquar-
ius, the Watery part of the Air element, the geomantic figure
Tristitia, the Tarot card The Star and the geomantic ruler Zazel.
```
Air Angle of Air Board-Yetzirah of Yetzirah
Matters needing continuous motion of thought and tremen-
dous intellectual energy. For states of insanity, instability. For
communication, negotiations, debates, studies, philosophy, rel-
atives, the abstract. Advertising, ideas and their outcome,
postal organizations, anything needing change, neighbors, short
journeys, messages, news.
Associated are the planet Mercury, the Zodiacal sign Gemi-
ni, the geomantic figure Albus, the Tarot card The Lovers and
the geomantic ruler Taphthartharath.
Earth Angle of Air Board-Assiah of Yetzirah
The threshold to the Earth element. This is the intellect at
its best and controlled aspect. Leadership, diplomats, specula-
tion, agreements, contracts made concrete, books, publications,
business journeys, psychology, media, acting out ideas. Good for
any matter where a person wishes to proceed quickly but safely.
Teaching, universities and other teaching institutions, where
change is necessary to reform. For the commencement of con-
crete ideas, the awakening.
Associated are the planet Uranus, the Earthy part of Air,
the geomantic figure Fortuna Minor, the Tarot card The Fool
and the geomantic ruler Sorath.
Earth Board
The World of Assiah-The World of Action and Matter
This element shows the "here and now" reality of the material
world. "Heh final" of lktragrammaton represents the Earth ele-
ment, concrete manifestation which again gives birth to the
'Yod" force. It is the passive and receptive; its strength is


```
206 Part III-Book of Water
```
```
endurance and persistence. Matters concerning building struc-
tures, the landlagriculture, our physical bodies, anything mate-
rial and not concerning the unseen world. Reproduction,
stability, recreation, possessions, wealth, poverty, greed.
```
Fire Angle of Earth Board-Atziluth of Assiah
For matters that require great physical energy, struggle for
attainment, to obtain power and authority, ceremonies, govern-
ments, professionslcareer, ambition, economy, employers, engi-
neering etc. Earthquakes, volcanos, passion, sexuality, compet-
itive sports, fighting, crime, penalties, prisons. Corporate orga-
nizations, companies, directors, rulers. Animals, labor, mines,
construction/building. Business ventures and their success or
failure. Exploration.
Associated are the planet Saturn, the Zodiacal sign Capri-
corn, the Fiery part of the Earth element, the geomantic figure
Carcer, the Tarot card The Devil and the geomantic ruler Zazel.
Water Angle of Earth Board-Briah of Assiah
Concerning growth of a matter, loss of goods or where one is
cut off from something or someone-finding the answer of get-
ting the loss back. Concerning art, creative endeavors, the actu-
al physical end result of one's artistic/creative efforts. Finance,
banking, possessions, investments, farming, jewelry, loans,
musical instruments, possessive emotions. Storage architec-
ture, excavations, irrigation, crops, the home, family unit, beau-
tifying anything, interior decoration, gardens, drugslmedicine.
Associated are the planet Venus, the Zodiacal sign Taurus,
the Watery part of the Earth element, the geomantic figure Arnis-
sio, the Tarot card Strength and the geomantic ruler Sorath.

Air Angle of Earth Board-Yetzirah of Assiah
For matters of conjunction, union, recovery, health, physical
ailments, operations, alternative healing, communication on
the physical level, travel over land. Writing, studies, agricul-
ture, employees, training, armed forces, chemicals, doctors, psy-
chiatry, libraries, organizing labor, assembly of groups/crowds,
conjunction of anything, renewing, computers, analysis, voca-


```
Setting Up Your Board for a Divination Game^207
```
tions, finding employment, education, demonstrations, semi-
nars, workshops, sales persons, commerce.
Associated are the planet Mercury, the Zodiacal sign Virgo,
the Airy part of the Earth element, the geomantic figure Con-
junctio, the Tarot card The Hermit and the geomantic ruler
Taphthartharath.

```
Earth Angle of Earth Board-Assiah of Assiah
All matters of the most earthy and physical nature. Build-
ings, constructions, machinery, industries, material gain and
belongings, entering into a venture, threshold of anything, good
for gain, to endure and persist in a project, involvement in the
practical world.
Associated are the planet Earth, the Earth element, the geo-
mantic figure Caput Draconis, the Tarot card The World and
the geomantic rulers Hismael and Kedemel.
```
```
The Squares
Choosing the Ptah Square
The squares of each Enochian chessboard have associated
attributes, as shown in Part I of this book. However, for conve-
nience, we will refer to them by their fixed Zodiac and astrolog-
ical house1 association so that each square may be identified
quickly and easily. Nevertheless, the full attributions of each
square must not be neglected in your final analysis of a divina-
tion game. The diagrams on the following pages show the Zodi-
ac sign (symbol) and house (number) attributions to the
chessboards. These diagrams will be helpful when you require a
quick reference to the squares during piece movement in a div-
ination game.
```
1. Astrological houses signify the 12 divisions of a daily cycle created by the
Earth's rotation on its axis each day. Each house has one of the 12 signs of the
Zodiac attributed to it, and it is through these attributions that we are work-
ing. These 12 houses represent an area of influence or activity in which one
can operate.


208 Part 111-Book of Water

```
Air Angle Water Angle
```
```
Earth Angle Fire Angle
FIGURE 48-HOus~ AND ZODIAC ATTRIBUTIONS TO THE FIRE
AND EARTH ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS
```
To choose the Ptah Square, you must choose a square to
which your question relates. By this time you would have
already decided on the board that will be used and the angle
that the querent is to play. The Ptah piece must sit in a square
of this angle.
The following descriptions of the houses from the diagrams
should provide a guideline to choosing your Ptah Square.
Where symbols of the elements (as opposed to astrological
signs) appear in the diagrams, there is no house association.

The diviner would choose an element square for the Ptah only


```
Setting Up Your Board for a Divination Game^209
Air Angle Water Angle
```
```
Earth Angle Fire Angle
```
```
FIGURE 49-HOuSE AND ZODIAC ATTRIBUTIONS TO THE WATER
AND AIR ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS
```
when no house could be attributed. This might occur in situa-
tions when the question was on too grand a scale to apply per-
sonally, as do the houses.

First House (1)-The beginning of a matter, childhood envi-
ronment, concerning the personality, physical body whether of
an individual, country or population; e.g., general character of a
race or community, or the condition it will be in. Life and health
of the querent, effects of any action on the querent's life. Self-
awareness, response of individual to outside stimuli.


```
210 Part III-Book of Water
```
Second House (2)-Financial conditions individually or
nationally, possessions, investments, property, stock exchange,
banks, commercial affairs and trade, losses and gains, loans.
The intent and fortune of those assisting the querent in any dif-
ficulty is revealed.

Third House (3)-Brothers, sisters, neighbors, short journeys,
writing, communication, books, transport, relationships, intel-
lect (conscious thought), logic, environment of family, forms of
communication, transport, stocks and bonds, nearby countries,
changes and removals of business, advisability of undertaking
any enterprise, documents to be signed, messages and news
from far away.

Fourth House (4)-For a man, the mother. For a woman, the
father. Houses, lands, agriculture, weather, mines, inherited
tendencies, estates, the end of a matter, environment, home,
private life, emotional makeup, public buildings. Politics of the
opposition. People against authority. Questions concerning the
latter part or end of life and its circumstances.
Fifth House (5)-Pregnancy, children of mind and body, plea-
sure, feasts, speculations, courtship, enterprises, creativeness,
instinctive affections, pets, playmates, loves and hates, sexual
relationships that are in the open, sports, gambling, forms of
amusement, theaters, educational facilities, public morals,
ambassadors and formal social functions.
Sixth House (6)-Work and toil, service and labor, employees,
and relationships thereof, subordinates, sickness, aunts, uncles.
The Army, Navy, and their machines of war. Public health, civil
service, working classes generally-strikes if afflicted. The
integrity of those you work with. Concerning those who depend
upon you, livestock, farmers, the querent's health and virtues of
those consulted on health.

```
Seventh House (7)-Partnerships personal and social, known
enemies, the "other party" in negotiations, legal affairs, con-
tracts and agreements, workings of karma, commerce, repre-
```

```
Setting Up Your Board for a Divination Game^211
```
sentatives and public relations. Marriage relationships and
divorce. Encounters with lawbreakers. The place you move to
when changing residence. International relationships, arbitra-
tions, wars, foreign trade.

Eighth House (8)-Deaths, suicides, wills, pain, anxiety,
estates of the deceased, mortality, death of the old and birth of
the new, crime, property of another, settlements, impulses,
moods, hidden sexual activities, the occult, mystical experi-
ences, the nonphysical. Privy councils, financial relations with
foreign countries, your partner's property, joint partnership, the
strength of public enemies,

Ninth House (9)-Religion, matters of the church, philosophy,
higher education; e.g., colleges, universities. Long travels, the
legal profession, relatives by law, concerns of the higher mind,
mental exploration, research, metaphysics, foreign countries,
divination ideals, civilization and its values-social morals,
commerce in general. The meanings of visions and dreams, the
accumulation of knowledge.

Tenth House (10)-For a woman, the querent's mother; for a
man, the querent's father. The outcome of your efforts to gain
public recognition, rank, honor, trade or profession, authority,
employment, ambition, businesslcareer success, law of cause
and effect, organization, discipline, government, power struc-
tures. Causes by which you may become disgraced. Pensions,
king, queen, president, prime minister, national trade, national
integrity, celebrities, aristocracy, credit and power.

Eleventh House (11)-Friends, hopes, wishes, clubs, societies,
groups, aspirations, openness, creative group expression on a
higher mental and intuitive level, humanity, fulfillment. Step-
children, income from business, social alliances, your attitude
towards people, Parliaments, House of Commons, the Senate
and House of Representatives, legislation, states, towns and
county governments, international friendships. Personal social
connections and their effect. The uppermost desires of the quer-
ent and possible fulfillment. Those that counsel.


212 Part 111-Book of Water

Twelfth House (12)-Imprisonment, assassination and suicide,
sorrows, fears, punishments, secret enemies and how successful
their schemes, unseen dangers, restriction, disappointments,
loss, self-sacrifice, forsaking worldly things for spiritual, health of
your partner, lengthy illnesses, psychological health, growth of
society, the past, understanding, hospitals and institutions, care
for unfortunates, retreats, spies. Secret societies, occult religions,
karmic responsibilities, the unconscious.

Once you have chosen your square, you are now in a position
to place your Ptah on this square, and prepare for play.

Piece Positions

The game-play setting in which your pieces are placed should, by
all accounts, be that of the angle from which you play. However,
there are rare occasions when one of the other settings applica-
ble to the board you are playing may be in greater affinity with
your question, to complete the associations to the question.
Examples of chosen boards, angles and Ptah squares:

A querent is concerned for her brother's happiness:
Q: Is my brother happy in his present situation?
A: Water Board, Air Angle, Gemini (Third House) square,
Air of Water play setting.

```
A querent is embarking on a business venture:
Q: Will my project that I am initiating flourish?
A: Earth Board, Fire Angle, Capricorn (Tenth House)
square, Fire of Earth play setting.
```
Q: How will my employees' working relationship go with my
new business venture?

```
A: Earth Board, Air Angle, Virgo (Sixth House) square, Air
of Earth play setting.
```

Ptah

##### T

he Ptah piece is silent and unmoving. In Egyptian mythol-
ogy Ptah was considered one of the greatest of all the old
gods, and his worship in one form or another goes back to
the earliest part of the dynastic periods.
The name Ptah has often been explained as "the opener." He
was a god of life and creation, later associated with the arts and
handicrafts. The master architect of stones and metals, Ptah was
believed to fashion our new bodies in the underworld. The Ptah
was called "father of fathers, power of powers, father of begin-
nings and creator of the egg(s) of the Sun and Moon, Lord of
Maat, King of the two lands, the god of the beautiful face in
Thebes, who created his own image, who fashioned his own body,
who hath established Maat throughout the two lands."' As a god-
form, he was a symbol of creation directed into matter and an

1. E. A. Wallis Budge, The Gods of the Egyptians, vol. 1.

```
213
```

```
214 Part 111-Book of Water
```
aspect or emanation from Atum (or the celestial Ra), the source of
becoming. So Ptah gave the breath of life to all things and was
considered the force which "brings into existence" all species.
In the form of the figure used in my own Enochian chess set,
the Ptah is seated on a throne and holds a knife in his right
hand and a I%-petaled daisy in the left. The knife was used in
performing the ceremony of "opening the mouth" of the gods.
The 12 petals represent time (the Zodiac), because Ptah is also
related to Cronos (time). The headgear relates to Maat, showing
the equilibrium in the balance of forces, the decision maker. Life
and afterlife oaths were sworn to Ptah.
The Ptah god-form represents the divine essence of the
Tablet of Union, both the corporeal and incorporeal forms. Its
nature is to bind certain forces relating to the question on the
chessboard, and by this action is representative of the two
aspects of the Enochian Tablets. Colored white for the purposes
of the chess game, it signifies beyond the spirit and the divine.
The Ptah must not be confused with the spirit forces and
actions of the Kings, for by their very existence they create the
F'tah piece in much the same way an electromagnetic field pro-
duces a current by polarity. In short, the Ptah is a higher form
of the Kings, but because of its station, which is more spiritual,
it is not utilized in this plane of existence. Hence the Ptah
remains motionless. Theoretically, the Ptah is invisible, and the
pieces on the board pass over or on the square upon which it sits
as if it did not exist.
The Ptah is a representative of the question and marks the
square to which the querent's King must attain. Apart from this
use in game play, when it is placed on an angle on a particular
square, the Ptah becomes the higher genius of the King of that
angle. The King in his earthly state must strive to be reunited
with his basic essence, the Ptah, with whom he must create a
strong link to prove his connection with Spirit.
The reason that the querent's King must remain on the Ptah
square with the Ptah for one round of the game is that the King
must not only unite with the Ptah, but go through the elements
in stages before that union is complete. As a piece in each ele-


```
Ptah 215
```
mental corner is activated during this critical round of the game,
so a different level has been achieved by the King (querent).
Here also you can see the most critical point of the divination
reading. The actions during this one last round of the game,
though classed as elemental, are really an element of Spirit.



Divinatory

Meanings

of the

Chess Pieces

## W

hen playing and analyzing your divination game, the
chess pieces play a major role. They are the forces in
action which signify the pattern and outcome of a matter
by virtue of their archetypes and movement across the
chessboard. As they move across the pyramid squares, forces
are activated according to the virtue of each square and the
chess piece thereon. To the chess pieces are given various asso-
ciations, and by virtue of these associations one can begin to
understand the type of vibration each piece generates.
The Enochian chess pieces can be viewed on different levels of
influence as regards their symbolic associations. On one level they
can be seen Kabbalistically as operators in the four Kabbalistic
Worlds as were the chessboards and their angles. For example:


218 Part 111-Book of Wafer

```
The World of Atziluth-The Fire Set and the four Worlds
therein:
Fire Knight-Atziluth of Atziluth-Yod of Yod force
Fire Queen-Briah of Atziluth-Heh of Yod force
Fire Bishop-Yetzirah of Atziluth-Vau of Yod force
Fire Rook-Assiah of Atziluth-Heh final of Yod force
```
And so this would go throughout the four Worlds for the other
elemental sets: Water set for Briah, Air set for Yetzirah and Earth
set for Assiah. From this you can see patterns of Worlds within
Worlds within more Worlds. The Kings are the representatives of
Kether (Spirit) in each Kabbalistic World, and the pawns are the
vice-gerents of each set of the four elemental pieces, They are the
moving elements of these Worlds, the subtle forces. The pawns
also represent the minor elemental portions of these Worlds, but
more especially of their quadrant in the board being operated on.
On another level, the chess pieces, like the boards, have Tarot
associations. However, instead of the Tarot Trumps, the court
cards (Royal Arcana) and the Aces are applied to the individual
pieces, which form archetypes. Here the diviner can see archetyp-
al movements over the pyramid squares that can represent indi-
viduals and their influence on the divination question. Within
each chess piece is its elemental association as well, and the sub-
elemental parts of elements within these pieces correspond to the
court cards. Table N shows the associations to the chess pieces.

```
Fire Set
Sub-Element
Spirit of Fire
Fire of Fire
Water of Fire
Air of Fire
Earth of Fire
```
```
Piece
King
Knight
Queen
Bishop
Rook
```
```
Court Card
Ace of Wands
Knight of Wands
Queen of Wands
PrinceXing of Wands
Princess of Wands
```

```
Divinatoq Meanings of the Chess Pieces^219
```
```
TABLE IV-ROYAL ARCANA AND ELEMENTAL ASSOCIATIONS OF
THE ENOCHIAN CHESS PIECES (CONTINUED)
```
If, however, you were looking at one pantheon per board, the
same associations would apply because, even though one ele-
mental pantheon would govern each angle, each set would still
represent the elements of each angle as identified by the colors
of their throneshases.
A further level of association with the chess pieces are the
planetary forces. Here the diviner can see planetary movements

```
Water Set
Piece
King
Knight
Queen
Bishop
Rook
```
```
Court Card
Ace of Cups
Knight of Cups
Queen of Cups
PrinceKng of Cups
Princess of Cups
```
```
Sub-Element
Spirit of Water
Fire of Water
Water of Water
Air of Water
Earth of Water
```
```
Air Set
Piece
```
-
    King
    Knight
       Queen
    Bishop
       Rook

```
Court Card
Ace of Swords
Knight of Swords
Queen of Swords
Prince/King of Swords
Princess of Swords
```
```
Sub-Element
Spirit of Air
Fire of Air
Water of Air
Air of Air
Earth of Air
```
```
Earth Set
Sub-Element
Spirit of Earth
Fire of Earth
Water of Earth
Air of Earth
Earth of Earth
```
```
Piece
King
Knight
Queen
Bishop
Rook
```
```
Court Card
Ace of Disks
Knight of Disks
Queen of Disks
Prince/King of Disks
Princess of Disks
```

```
220 Part III-Book of Water
```
over the pyramid squares. This would show planets moving into
houses and Zodiac signs. From an astrological viewpoint, complete
stories can be formed from this. Table V below gives the planetary
associations that I deem appropriate as a result of research and
practice; however, you may choose to form your own opinion.
The divination section of the Enochian chess game has an
emphasis on astrology, and to understand the full functions of
the divination game you should really study astrology or have
at least a basic knowledge of its essence. Without it, you would
be handicapped in using the chess game for divination. Within
our own temple, any members who are taught the divination
aspects of the Enochian chess game must have first reached a
level where they are very proficient in astrology. I seriously sug-
gest that, if you wish to study the divinatory part of the game
more deeply, you should study basic astrological meanings and
the movements of the planets through the various astrological
houses. Although the entire divination game is not totally astro-
logical in nature, the framework in which it operates is.

```
If Querent
Plays
Fire set
Water set
Air set
Earth set
```
```
Chess Pieces
Queens
Knights
Bishops
Rooks
Pawns
```
```
Air
King
Uranus
Uranus
Sun
Uranus
```
```
Air
Moon
Jupiter
Mercury
Venus
Air, Fire,
Water
```
```
Earth
King
Pluto
Neptune
Uranus
Sun
```
```
Earth
Moon
Jupiter
Chiron
Saturn
Earth, Fire,
Water
```
```
Fire
King
Sun
Pluto
Pluto
Pluto
```
```
Fire
Moon
Mars
Chiron
Saturn
Fire, Air,
Earth
```
```
Water
King
Neptune
Sun
Neptune
Neptune
```
```
Water
Moon
Mars
Mercury
Venus
Water, Air,
Earth
```

```
Divinato y Meanings of the Chess Pieces^221
```
The querent's King always represents the Sun (the querent
him or herself) and the other three Kings take on the three
outer, slower planets. Throughout the foregoing table you will
see the Earth element taking on a different planet each time, as
all of these planets have an influence on Earthlmatter.
The pawns are extensions of the pieces to which they are
vice-gerents, and their associations have been discussed earlier
in this book (in "Constructing the Chess Pieces"). Through their
elemental influence, however, they can represent movements in
time along the earth plane, and aspects of the psyche. They
could also be attributed to asteroids.
As regards the human physical appearances corresponding
to the chess pieces, experience has proven that there is no set
appearance per piece, only a generalized view as given in the
Golden Dawn Tarot court cards. However, this becomes more
heavily modified as a piece works through different elemental
sections of the boards, which results in a lack of consistency in
the physical appearance signified by any individual chess piece.
I have found that the chess pieces represent individuals by per-
sonality, not only as described below but by their elemental
attributions, sometimes giving a particular appearance or char-
acter. If you look carefully at your friends, you will be able to see
what combination of elements they represent most. For exam-
ple, a woman who is generous, loving and rather mystical in
appearance or character, but too passive and reflective in
nature, would be represented by the Water Queen, the Watery
part of Water. Sometimes I have found the elemental combina-
tions allude to a combination of a person's Sun sign and rising
sign, or sometimes one of these with the Moon sign.'
The operation of the chess pieces on the chessboards can be
positive or negative. It all depends on the circumstances
described during any individual moment of game play. There-
fore, only a general description can be given below on each of
the chess pieces.

1. These are astrological terms for planetary and first house cusp positions.


```
222 Part III-Book of Water
```
```
The Kings
A King "answereth to the action of the Spirit." Wherever they
move, they initiate a fresh current, but in a balanced movement
which first starts as a mute force (throned upon water) then fin-
ishes as:
```
... life manifested and throned upon the earth. And herein is
a mystery of the Lord Aeshoori when enthroned between Isis
and Nephthys, thus representing the beginning and end of the
action of Him in whom end and beginning are not, but rather
concealment and then manifestation. Herein is a great mys-
tery of life, for His Thrones are not in the two active elements,
seeing that these latter are his horse and chariot of transition
in the passage from concealment into manifestation. This
piece, then, is the symboliser of the action of the potencies of
the crosses on the Servient

```
The Enochian chess pieces represent the "Word" Yeheshuah
(YHShVH). The central letter in the middle of the letters of
Tetragrammaton is the Hebrew letter "Shin" and is represented
by the Kings. Since Shin represents the hidden force of Spirit
behind the whole name YHVH,3 its true title is Yeheshuah. As
such, Spirit as Shin can be placed behind any of the four holy
names, likened to the four Kings, just as another piece, itself
represented by a letter of Tetragrammaton, always shares the
Throne Square with the King at the beginning of the game.
In Egyptian mythology, the King alludes to the Osiris myth,
and Zeus in Greek myth~logy.~
```
2. "Notes on Rosicrucian Chess" by S.L. MacGregor Mathers.
3. For a full discourse on this name, see the Kabbalistic book Shaar Ruach Ha
Kodesh (The Gate of the Holy Spirit) by Chaim Vital, part of which is given in
Meditation and Kabbalah by Aryeh Kaplan (Weiser, 19821, p. 222.
4. You are advised to do your own research into the mythologies associated
with the chess pieces; this is a far too lengthy and complex a subject to be
included in this book.


```
Divinato y Meanings of the Chess Pieces 223
```
```
King of the Fire Pantheon: Chnupis Kneph
The unmanifested force of Divine Will penetrating manifesta-
tion as a positivelmasculine energy. An uncontrolled force in
operation that can be likened to fate in action. Therefore in div-
ination the Fire King shows forces beyond one's control entering
into a situation-creative energy. The type of situation it enters
is described by the square the King moves into and its relation-
ship to the surrounding chess pieces. The force can be violent or
gentle and depicts transmutation.
```
```
King of the Water Pantheon: Ptah Ra Pan-Lses
```
A generative force pouring forth from the Waters of Creation
manifesting from the Great Mother as the immortal spiritual
nature of mankind, a passivelfeminine energy. The Water King
represents the unconscious mind. As it moves over the squares,
it shows the areas where conscious realization, love and wisdom
are needed, where waste must be purged, and where there is or
must be fluent soul/emotional expression. It shows areas of fer-
tility and the dominance of Spirit over Matter.

King of the Air Pantheon: Socharis
The power of manifesting forces being directed to either good or
evil-a masculine force. The King of Swords shows where igno-
rance must be dispelled and spiritual energy invoked to manifest
Truth. As a divinatory piece the King therefore moves to where
there is affliction which must be eliminated, punishment be met
and justice be affirmed. It is the power of thought and represents
an irresistible force that cannot be stopped without the powers of
the unmanifest behind you. It shows that the higher intellect
can pierce the planes of understanding and wisdom.

```
King of the Earth Pantheon: Osiris
```
The unmanifest becoming manifest as a union of Spirit and
Matter. Feminine force. As a divinatory piece the Earth King
ministers to the development of the matter and shows what can


224 Part IIZ-Book of Water

be brought forth through material manifestation. It represents
both heaven and earth, life and death. Limitations of matter are
depicted, however, and through its movements and relation-
ships with the other chess pieces a blueprint of the cosmic
knowledge of a situation can be seen. In divination the Earth
King, like all the Kings, is neither good nor bad; it all depends
on the querent's intentions, or the intentions of the forces or
those that oppose the querent.

The Knights
This piece represents the action of Fire and is the Yod force. As
Hoor is the avenger of Aeshoori, the Knight is the Revealer of
the Strength of Spirit. Its force is seen potent and terrible, open-
ing the locked doors of matter which reveal the treasure within.
"Therefore hath all life its beginnings in a fire Celestial."
As an archetype, the Knight is the warrior, hero, avenger
and rescuer. As the Yod force, it is the Father and the initiator-
the commencement of material forces. Swift, violent, short in
effect but long in affect. The Egyptian myths of Horus and his
many aspects are good examples of this archetype. For example,
the Roman god Mars, the Greek god Ares, and many other sons
of the Sun represented by a symbolic birth, a period of youth
and exile and then as a young warrior. As an avenger the
Knight is also a protector and therefore has a dual role in the
divination game.

```
Knight of the Fire Pantheon: Ra
The divinatory meaning here is too much energy or force in a
matter, but only shortened force; there is no staying power. This
can lead to destruction or creation; for example, instigating new
enterprises, projects, etc., or sudden endings, dangerous situa-
tions. This Knight is a catalyst to circumstances wherever it is
moved and whatever piece it threatens. As an archetype, he is
an innovator, but tends to act too hastily, or burns himself out
from too much effort and energy, therefore overly active and
```

```
Divinato y Meanings of the Chess Pieces 225
```
restless. Problems can occur when dealing with others due to
self-centeredness and unrestrained desire to act directly.
Abrupt and aggressive, given to exaggeration, very passionate,
overconfident and self-indulgent. As a Mars force, his actions on
the boards allude to a Mars effect such as combativeness, exec-
utive abilities, energy and sex, physical activities, accidents,
quarrels, courage or daring.

Knight of the Water Pantheon: Sebek
Careful discrimination takes place when this Knight enters into
play, and the quality of things is examined. Rationality is now
used and knowledge is transferred; however, if negatively posi-
tioned, this piece shows limitation and communication break-
down. Desires can become greater than ability, or be contained
too much below the surface. The square position of this Knight
will show what is being hidden in a person's thoughts, or where
a situation or a person is impressionable and may react too
strongly to external impetus rather than his or her own drive.
The archetype is one of emotional feelings without true control,
responding more to desire. Positively aspected, this Knight will
show illumination of thoughts and ideas, and an understanding
of cause and effect. There is strength and outer protection;
therefore it may show a person who can shield you from diffi-
culty. The Water Knight is a Mars force that works more in an
undercurrent effect rather than on the surface like the Fire
Knight.

Knight of the Air Pantheon: Socharis
This is an archetype that gives orders and directions, a quick
mind, fleetness of purpose. As a thinker and planner he can be
the architect of many things; however, to actually get anything
done reinforcements must be brought in. He can be a teacher, a
good listener and give an objective opinion about things. He can
brood too much, which brings storminess in nature and can
bring harshness to a situation. He represents travel and move-
ment. If this piece is left to sit too long in one place, it shows


```
226 Part III-Book of Water
```
problems in the area that the square depicts. There must be
short, swift bursts of energy in a matter to keep the impetus up;
otherwise a situation or person will crumble. Distinction is
made as to what is good, and in sympathy with the question,
and what must be judged and swiftly dealt with. The Air Knight
represents communication being made and future events
shaped or planned. Wherever he is placed on a board, matters of
swiftness are depicted. He is a Jupiter force, showing new vis-
tas and opportunities, speculation and travel. Well positioned,
cheerfulness and good hopes. If negatively positioned the Air
Knight shows risks taken, waste of energy or material goods.

```
Knight of the Earth Pantheon: Horus
```
Nourishment and abundance, fertility and wealth are depicted
here. If positively positioned the Earth Knight shows growth,
regeneration and prosperity, but this is only while there is pur-
pose and direction to the Knight's moves or position; otherwise
a situation may be considered sterile, static or inert. He shows
where there is potential and hope. The archetype is one who
wants more of everything, a "well-to-do" person, or one who has
attained a lot through hard work. Sometimes extravagant,
exaggerating and overconfident, but very practical. A warm
character who can be very giving under the right circum-
stances. The Earth Knight's effect on the house (square) he may
be placed in is not as quick as that of the other Knights, but it is
still a catalyst, and things do happen because he is a prime
mover of things to come. His effect is longer lasting, with a pow-
erful momentum. The Earth Knight is a Jupiter force of a bene-
ficial material nature.

```
The Queens
This is the Heh force in Tetragrammaton, that of a receptivelfem-
inine nature. In mythology she is referred to as the mature
woman, the fertile and maternal figure. Some archetypal associ-
ations are the Egyptian myths of Isis, Hathor, Nuit and many
```

```
Divinatoy Meanings of the Chess Pieces^227
```
other counterparts of these goddesses. In other mythologies her
counterparts would be Hera and Hecate. So many goddesses
come under the archetype of the Queen. Although some were con-
sidered virginal, most of the goddesses applied to the Enochian
chess queen were mother archetypes. A threefold aspect must be
considered here: the maiden, mother and crone. Many were one
and the same but were separated as aspects of the one. In the
identity of mother and daughter, the eternally child-bearing
mother manifests herself as an eternal being.
The chess Queen is associated with the Moon. The Moon is
the Queen Mother of the heavens. She is known by many names
in different civilizations (Isis, Virgin Mary, Diana of Ephesus,
Shu, etc). As Luna, or Lucina, she presided over childbirth and
life, and as Hecate she was the goddess of death. She ruled in the
underworld over magic and enchantments, and in heaven she
was the chaste Diana, the Queen of Night. In Babylon the Moon
was worshiped as the god Sin, and by the Jews as Jehovah.
From this you can see that the Moon was generally taken as
feminine, but occasionally has been referred to as a cause in
itself, and spoken of as male, or as an androgyne, or a triple
power in itself. For example, Diana the Moon-goddess was
sometimes called "three formed": Diana the shy, Diana
(Artemis) on Earth and Proserpine (Persephone) in the world of
the dead. The crescent Moon was connected with her, as it was
with the Chaldean Astarte and the Egyptian Isis. The Hindus
had a myth of the Moon being the parent of Mercury.
In Enochian chess divination, the Queen's movements are
like the undulating waves of the sea, and a cherisher of Life. As
mentioned above, she can represent either a young or old
woman; however, the general association would be a woman
over 30 (unless the individual's appearance and character
proves otherwise in nature) or one who has had children.
She is represented by the Moon, which shows reaction on
the basis of subconscious disposition. Movements over a chess-
board would allude to day-to-day matters, mental and emotion-
al karmic patterns which either inhibit or help us in our
attempts of adjustment and expression in life. Wherever she is


228 Part III-Book of Water

placed shows a spontaneous reaction to a matter, emotional ups
and downs. She also symbolizes the image of oneself and how
one may see one's dealings with the public. Therefore a stressed
position would show disharmony in everyday dealings, whereas
a fortunate positioning shows harmony. Positioned where
another piece is threatened would show stress being placed on
the threatened piece. Fertility and childbirth are also repre-
sented by the Queen.
In the Fire element, the Queen shows quick and often
impulsive action to a situation; in the Water element reactions
are based on emotional intensity; in the Air element instinctive
action without thought is depicted; and in the Earth element a
steady type of calm reaction to a given situation.

```
Queen of the Fire Pantheon: Sati-Ashtoreth
```
This Queen represents persistent energy, calm authority, kind-
ness, generosity and a capacity for friendship and love, but at
her own initiation. There is much pride, charm and social ease
with popularity. Adversely positioned, she shows impatience,
brooding, gullibility, and one who harbors revenge. She shows a
sharp tongue and cruel wit. She may tend to intoxication during
periods of melancholy.
Moving over the squares, this chess piece shows situations
that are incomplete or are adjusting and adapting, successful
achievement, and balance and harmony being within one's
power. There may be initial obstacles, but success after disor-
der. General impulsiveness to situations without pre-thought if
you allow matters to influence you on a subconscious level.

```
Queen of the Water Pantheon: Thoueris
```
The image for this archetype is of beauty and purity with infi-
nite subtlety. A highly imaginative person who is artistic. Very
intuitive, receptive and transmissive of surrounding influences.
Adversely positioned she is a dreamer, and so reflective of out-
side influences or other people's thoughts that none can see
through her to the truth. Sometimes perverseness and distor-


```
Divinatory Meanings of the Chess Pieces 229
```
```
tion of facts. Very moody, however, psychic ability, and some-
times prophetic.
As the Water Queen is moved over a board, she shows success
and benefits in day-to-day affairs, talk and social enjoyment. If
adversely aspected or aspecting another piece, she shows you
must check your actions to avoid danger in matters, and advises
one to be careful and patient and to beware of trickery and deceit.
There may be difficulty in growth or movement. A waiting period
is shown, but if this Queen is weakly positioned, it may show the
lack of incentive to get moving and change matters.
```
Queen of the Air Pantheon: Knousou Pekht
This is an archetype with the power of transmission, an intelli-
gent and complex person with attention to detail and accuracy.
A keen observer, graceful and skilled at balancing situations,
therefore versatile. Adversely positioned, she is cruel, sly, half
truths and quiet slander, superficial beauty and attractiveness
aids in deceit.
In her movements over a board, she shows how one can take
hold of matters and turn them to one's advantage. There is
always a struggle, but there is plenty of ability for great under-
takings if one wills it. Sometimes ambitions are greater than
abilities. The untrustworthy must be avoided, so work to
improve a situation and oneself, which will attract success.
Then potential will be fulfilled. This piece shows breakthroughs
and situations being dealt with before they become too danger-
ous. Badly aspecting other pieces, she may show someone lay-
ing down the law to others concerning a situation, and dealing
with arrogance.

```
Queen of the Earth Pantheon: Isis
This archetype shows one with quiet qualities, a "down-to-
earth" person, compassionate and a lover of luxury who usually
collects possessions. She gives great affection and is very for-
giving, hardworking and sensible. Usually domesticated and
not intellectually inclined. Adversely positioned, there can be
```

```
230 Part 111-Book of Water
```
```
debauch, spendthriftiness, general extravagance, narrowness in
sight and abuse of alcohol or drugs. She could be too materialis-
tic, dull andlor foolish.
When the Earth Queen is moved over a board, she shows
areas or situations where there is attraction, stimulation, co-
operation and merging of separate parts, relationships between
people and gatherings. She shows that there is enough success in
a matter to continue and that all is being nourished for growth.
After a struggle, one is succeeding. Adversely, it is not a good time
for movement. Wait for a more appropriate time for change.
```
The Bishops
In mythology the Bishops represent counterparts of the
Knights. They took the role as the second brother-usually a
god-form of light, but sometimes the jealous and the destroyer
who plots against his father or brother. The Mercurial aspect of
this god-form depicts the messenger, like Hermes of the Greeks
or the Roman god Mercury. These gods had the gift of prophecy.
The Bishop represents a keen and swift wind, is ascribed to
Aroueris as an Egyptian god-form and represents the swift
vehicle of Spirit. The four Bishops are all variations of Aroueris,
as shown by their Egyptian god-names, although they are all
but aspects of Horus and Osiris.
The Bishop represents the Vau force. The Son of the Mother
and Father who realizes the balance of the scales. He then mar-
ries the daughter in Malkuth, which is also known as Kalah the
Bride, and the cycle starts again as the Son and Daughter
become Father and Mother. He is straight and airy but is
obstructed by any solid object and must go around. He repre-
sents intellect and communication. The Yetziratic World of For-
mation. A planner and thinker who tries to initiate matter. In a
divination game, the Bishop can act for or counteract your
plans, depending on his position on the board. He is the first
and sometimes last resort in matters.
The Planets associated with the Bishop are Mercury and
Chiron. The Mercury influence shows relationships, writing,


```
Divinatoy Meanings of the Chess Pieces^231
```
travel, the mind and intellect, changes of thought and occupa-
tion, studies and examinations. Sometimes irritations and vex-
ations, problems with transport and dealings with relatives.
The Chiron influence shows timing of events, foreseeing out-
comes, teaching, guardians, or mentor, medical science, the
healer. A loner and sometimes a maverick or pioneer. Creative-
ness and showing a better way, a guide or link to something.

```
Bishop of the Fire Pantheon: Toum
```
This is an individual who is eager for action and who has
strength and drive to carry effort through. When this piece is
placed in a fighting situation, it shows aggression being pulled
along by a lot of strength and energy. A definite direction is
being applied, as this is not a scattered force. The situation can
be volatile, however, so it must be directed by Will. Expanding
horizons are depicted and plans are carefully applied.
The danger here is not being able to settle on anything in a
situation that requires a decision. Positively aspected, this
Bishop shows strength and decisiveness. Matters which are dis-
tinguished according to their nature. There is independent
thought and reason. Negatively aspected, you will see a force
that cannot be stopped, which influences everything around it
and ignores all stops. In business, he shows a forward move-
ment with little that can hold him back. He also depicts travel,
but only with a purpose.

```
Bishop of the Water Pantheon: Hapimoun
This Bishop shows superficiality coming into a situation. Some-
thing which cannot be trusted. Something is being kept secret.
In a situation, hidden depths have not yet been reached or pen-
etrated. There is continual voyaging and unrest, travel. This is
a transitional state in all matters where the surface is just
being skimmed, and one from harmony and balance to penetra-
tion and transformation. As an individual, you will be dealing
with someone who has control over emotion and who can act
objectively. However, such controlled emotions are not resolved
```

```
232 Part III-Book of Water
```
```
and dam up, at times causing an overflow. This is an individual
who applies himself to a task with plenty of drive, but he uses
any means to obtain the desired result without consideration
for others. Action is a means to release emotions. Positively
aspected, he is objective and willing to look for causes of prob-
lems and then get rid of them. He who can take good counsel.
```
```
Bishop of the Air Pantheon: Shu Zoan
When moving across the chessboard, this Bishop shows areas of
no restriction, where whim is followed. Energy may be wasted
and answers may become elusive. It can show one's mind racing
too fast. As an individual, the Air Bishop shows the thinker and
planner who handles matters skillfully. Vast plans are brought
into action; however, this person can be very abstract and is in
danger of losing sight of the goal. Negatively placed, the reality
of a situation can be disassociated from, especially when dealing
with peoples' emotions. Usually this person will be traveling or
handling matters alone. Energies can be scattered in too many
directions, matters happen too fast and confusion can set in. Too
many people are having their say, which confuses matters even
further. There is indecision, and one ends up not getting any-
where but running in circles. Positively aspected, caution is
applied together with a willingness to try on all accounts. Old
values are broken for new concepts to follow.
```
```
Bishop of the Earth Pantheon: Aroueris
```
Wherever this Bishop is placed positively, one will see prosperi-
ty and growth. Matters operate slowly but surely. It rules sea-
sonal changes, fertility and matters of development. Everything
must be timed if one wishes success. Matters materialize and
all efforts and theory take root as the final formula is put into
place. Therefore the material result of all one's efforts are begin-
ning to show. As an individual, it is someone who seeks comforts
with some effort. He takes everything in his stride, one day at a
time. Both intellectual and physical effort is applied to anything
that is desired. He is generous and loving. Negatively, he is


```
Divinatory Meanings of the Chess Pieces 233
```
greedy and too materialistic, making an excuse for everything.
When moving across the board, the Earth Bishop shows situa-
tions of gain, movement, shifting from one place to another tak-
ing all your possessions. In the business world, everything is
obtained through progression.

The Rooks
In Tetragrammaton, the Rooks are "Heh final," the Daughter
that married the Son. She is the feminine part and represents a
full cycle of development in preparation for entering a new
cycle. In mythology she is depicted as the Amazon warrior
queen or princess, and starts off as the virgin goddess; for exam-
ple, the myths of Diana, Athene, Artemis of Ephesus,
Aphrodite, Nike, Nephthys, etc. At some stage throughout some
myths, this goddess loses her virginity. In some cases she
becomes the harlot and in others the Mother. She is ordinarily
barren but sometimes fruitful. Some myths show her entering
the underworld where she becomes for part of each year a god-
dess of the dead.
This chess piece represents a pondering, formidable Earth
force, and is the completed action of Spirit in Matter. Wherever
she is moved, matters crystallize, become more apparent. Temp-
tation of matter, whether sexual or material, is always near. The
Rook shows ideas put into concrete action, or matters under con-
struction when positively aspected. When negatively aspected,
ideas or matters under collapse. The Rooks are "time pieces."
The planetary influences for the Rook are Saturn and Venus.
The Venus influence shows relationships of a sexual nature,
pleasure, holidays, enjoyment, social life and social adjustments,
music and the arts, matters of beauty and materialism. The Sat-
urn influence shows conservativeness, consolidation of affairs
and resources. If badly positioned, disappointment and loss, ill
health, responsibilities and burden, duration of time. There is a
strong sense of duty from individuals and dealings with land,
possessions, estates, etc.


```
Part III-Book of Wafer
```
Rook of the Fire Pantheon: Anouke
This is a very powerful personality who is fully able to back up
her wants and commands. She is strong-willed and forceful. She
is generally able to control her emotions, although ready to fight
if challenged. If the ultimate goal will benefit her, she will con-
form to conditions around her. She can create or destroy,
depending on her position on the board. Negatively aspected,
she tends to be wanton and a bit loose with her virtues. She
makes up her own mind on matters, and if told what to do will
go in the reverse direction. When this Fire Rook is moved to dif-
ferent squares on a board, it shows situations where sudden
concrete action is taken after a period of stillness. This action is
sometimes impulsive and sometimes calculated, depending on
the previous movements on the board. Strong effects are felt in
the areas of life depicted by the squares to which she is moved.

```
Rook of the Water Pantheon: Shooen
```
This individual is soft but determined in nature, although
rather dreamy. However, her tremendous strength of purpose
can turn her dreams into reality. Most of her actions are emo-
tionally charged, so emotional involvement is rarely avoided.
Her beliefs and convictions are strong, though she usually acts
in harmony with the times. There is no forgiveness for those
who cross her, and she can set up quite a campaign against her
enemies. She likes to share her experiences, and her expression
is to create.
In divinatory matters, dreams and ideas are being crystal-
lized. People are being nourished and educated, and the battle
of life is being won. Turmoil and chaos may be around, but it is
not bothering a matter, and a new life force is developing to a
situation. If positively aspected, nothing will sway the querent
from a task. If this Rook is situated in a position where she is
not influencing any situation, it shows that too much time is
spent on entertainment and self-indulgence.


```
Divinato y Meanings of the Chess Pieces
```
```
Rook of the Air Pantheon: Tharpeshest Jefine Pasht
```
This is an individual with a practical grasp of a situation who
needs to express herself through an abstract, quasi-intellectual
manner. However, material matters sometimes do not move as
fast as the mind's conception of plans; therefore, she can get
very frustrated when everything moves slowly. Patience needs
to be learned. Negatively aspected, she shows no compassion for
others and only intellectualizes situations. If she has not expe-
rienced it, she will not understand it.
In divinatory matters, social and communal integration is
shown, together with the expression of the culture of those
around one. Ideas are materialized. The people are benefited
rather than the individual. Goals must be worked for. Nega-
tively aspected, this piece shows where victory can be snatched
away from others for selfish ends. In tense situations on the
chessboard, she may be the bearer of exciting news.

```
Rook of the Earth Pantheon: Nephthys
```
A receptive, fertile situation is depicted here. The Earth Rook
shows matters of finality which now must open up and be recep-
tive to a new cycle. Therefore we see here a situation of absorption
to those of fixed expression and pursuits, because a revision of
ideals and situations must take place. The old must be discarded.
The squares where the Rook is placed show where consciousness
and awareness are necessary. Journeys may be disrupted.
This is the beginning of a matter and yet the end of a matter.
Concerning growth, it shows the potential to be great, but it
depends entirely on the individual. Good luck is depicted; how-
ever, it can be the reverse if the Rook is adversely aspected by
another chess piece. A situation or person can be relied upon,
and new concepts are consistently being put into effect. Nega-
tively aspected, one might encounter others who are hungry for
power, who are ready to sacrifice anything that gets in their way.
As an individual, she is one who gets on with things and
accomplishes things rather than spending time thinking about
them. Kind and generous, but encourages materialism.



Analyzing a

Divination

Game

##### F

irst draw up a recording sheet; then commence your game.
Record every move made on your sheet, but do not concern
yourself with analyzing the game during the initial divina-
tion game play. By analyzing while playing, an overconcen-
tration of the intellectual processes on your game occurs, and this
interferes with the unseen forces which guide your divination
play and intuition. Once the game is over, you can then analyze it
by re-enacting the chess moves from your recorded sheet.
According to what your needs may be, you may analyze an
Enochian chess divination game in full, in summary or with a
short answer. A short analysis caters to a "yes or no" type of
question. This is where you see whether the King obtains the
Ptah Square or not, and if so, under what duress does it remain
there. For example, if the King reaches the Ptah and stays
there for one round of the game, the answer is "successful." If
the King does not reach the Ptah, the answer is "unsuccessful."


```
238 Part 111-Book of Water
```
If the King reaches the Ptah but has strong or minor opposition
while staying on the Ptah Square for one round of the game, the
question is successful but with difficulty. By observing what
type of opposition there is to the Ptah Square at the end of the
game, you will be able to see the circumstances of any difficulty,
and whether the success is partial, brief or lasting.
A summary analysis skims over the whole game play, sum-
marizing the overall influences without detail, and gives an end
result. It may dwell on one or two pertinent points of impor-
tance described by the game.
A full analysis is made by studying the effects of all moves
made from the first to the last move. In the information given
below, the emphasis is on reading the results of your divination
game from the perspective of a full analysis.
During your game, you will find that the querent7s ally's
pieces show a force in favor of the querent, whereas the oppo-
nents' forces are against the interests of the querent. Attacking
forces will show how the elements treat the querent, or the mat-
ter in concern. The ally's actions describe how much support is
given. The pieces which the querent operates are aspects of
himherself. When an answer is obtained, the querent can then
see the outcome, the force resisting the outcome and how the
resisting forces will go about their attack. This can be very help-
ful when planning a future venture.
A great many things must be considered in your analysis to
form a full picture.

```
Piece Movement and How the Pieces
Relate to the Question
```
Viewing the pieces as archetypes/personalities will help when
a question refers to human relationships. If for example the
Fire Knight blocks a King from the Ptah, this may mean a
man of fiery temperament obstructing you. In a macrocosmic
perspective, the Knight could represent a government or
country fitting the Knight's elemental nature and that causes
the obstruction.


```
Analyzing a Divination Game 239
```
The pawns may stand for people of a lesser influence, or
groups of people, being manipulated by the respective archetype
described by any piece influencing them. This of course could be
the reverse where the group of people influence the individual.
The pawns, however, generally show happenings and influences
rather than personalities, and their nature is the nature of the
piece to which they are vice-gerent.
A chess piece, when moving from one angle of the chess-
board to another angle, retains its essential character. Any
changes that do take place are the elemental affects on that per-
sonality; for example, a change of thought, action, direction or
emotion. The chess pieces are also found to be weakened or
strengthened in different elements; therefore, this would occur
when they are played on the different elemental boards and
when they move into the various angles during play. This
means that a piece weakened by an angle it moves into will
have a weaker influence on any piece or square it may influ-
ence. If it is moved into an element that gives it added strength,
then its effect will be great on the surrounding pieces and
squares. Observe also when a buildup of pieces takes place in a
particular element. For example, a concentration of pieces in
the Fire Angle of a board will show a very heated situation in
which everything will be moving a lot faster. Table VI (page
240) shows the strengths and weaknesses of the chess pieces in
the elemental boards and angles.
The planetary influence of a piece must also be taken into
consideration. You must observe what pieces a piece may
threaten because this shows what planets aspect each other.
Observe the square upon which a piece is placed because this
shows a planet in a Zodiacal sign and house. Table VII shows
the strengths and weaknesses of the pieces as planets in the
Zodiac (on the chess squares).
Table VI, on the following page, is based on "The Concourse
of Forces" as given in Regardie's Golden Dawn.


TABLE VI-ELEMENTAL STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF THE CHESS PIECES IN THE CHESSBOARDS AND ANGLES (^2 0)
Chess Piece
Fire King
Water King
Air King
Earth King
Fire Queen
Water Queen
Air Queen
Earth Queen
Fire Knight
Water Knight
Air Knight
Earth Knight
Fire Bishop
Water Bishop
Air Bishop
Earth Bishop
Fire Rook
Water Rook
Air Rook
Earth Rook
All Pawns
Strongest Angle
Fire of Fire
Water of Water
Air of Air
Earth of Earth
Water of Fire
Water nf Water
Water of Air
Water of Earth
Fire of Fire
Water of Fire
Air of Fire
Earth of Fire
Fire of Air
Water of Air
Air of Air
Earth of Air
Fire of Earth
Water of Earth
Air of Earth
Earth of Earth
Own angle
Strong Angle
Its own
element
angle on
any board
Fire of Water
Air of Water
Air of Water
Air of Earth
Fire of Air
Fire of Water
Earth of Fire
Fire of Earth
Earth of Air
Air of Water
Water of Air
Fire of Air
Earth of Fire
Air of Earth
Water of Earth
Fire of Earth
Ally angle
Angle in Detriment
Air Board
Earth Board
Fire Board
Water Board
Earth of Air
Earth of Earth
Earth of Fire
Earth of Water
Air of Air
Earth of Air
Fire of Air
Water of Air
Air of Fire
Earth of Fire
Fire of Fire
Water of Fire
Air of Water
Earth of Water
Fire of Water
Water of Water
Opposite angle
Weakest Angle
Water Board
Fire Board
Earth Board
Ar Board
Air of Earth
Fire of Fire
Fire of Earth
Fire of Air
Water of Water
Air of Earth
Earth of Water
Air of Water
Water of Earth
Fire of Earth
Earth of Earth
Air of Earth
Water of Air
Fire of Air
Earth of Air
Air of Air
Side angle


The Fire King is strongly attracted to the Leo square, the Water King to the Scorpio square, the Air
King to the Aquarius square and the Earth King to the Taurus square.

```
Planet
Sun
Moon
Mercury
Venus
```
```
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn
Chiron
Uranus
Neptune
Pluto
```
```
Sign of
Detriment
Aquarius
Capricorn
Sagittarius
Scorpio
and Aries
Libra
Gemini
Cancer
Pisces
Leo
Virgo
Taurus
```
```
Sign of
Fall
Libra
Scorpio
Pisces
Virgo
```
```
Cancer
Capricorn
Aries
Gemini
Taurus
Gemini
Aquarius
```
```
Sign of
Rulership
Leo
Cancer
Gemini
Taurus
and Libra
Aries
Sagittarius
Capricorn
Virgo
Aquarius
Pisces
Scorpio
```
```
Sign of
Exaltation
Aries
Taurus
Virgo
Pisces
```
```
Capricorn
Cancer
Libra
Sagittarius
Scorpio
Sagittarius
Leo
```
```
Quadruplicity
Fixed
Cardinal
Mutable
Fixed
```
```
Cardinal
Mutable
Fixed
Cardinal
Mutable
Mutable
Fixed
```

```
Part III-Book of Water
```
```
TABLE VIII-OPERATION OF PLANETS IN HOUSES
```
The planets represent specific principles of energy exchange
between the individual square and the universal supply of all
energy. Each planet therefore reveals not only a type of outgoing
energy and an urge toward expression of a certain kind, but it
also reveals a specific need for activity and fulfillment that must
be fed along a particular vibratory wavelength. This vibratory
wavelength is used as a catalyst to the vibration of the Zodiac
sign and other attributions of the square. From this the makeup
and function of the Servient Square become more clear.

Planets in the Elements

Mercury in:
Earth-Through action, practical needs.
Air-Abstract thoughts.
Water-Influenced by deepest yearnings and subconscious
predispositions.
Fire-Influenced by aspirations, positive thinking.


```
Analyzing a Divination Game
```
Venus in:
Earth-Tangible commitments.
Air-Sharing expressed in words.
Water-Emotional feeding and sympathetic, steady respon-
siveness of sensitivity and vulnerability.
Fire-Grand gestures.

```
Mars in:
Earth-Expression of will and assertive power through con-
crete achievement.
Air-Expression of idea.
Water-Harnessed emotional power, assertion towards
unconscious desires.
Fire-Direct physical action.
```
```
Moon in:
Earth-Reaction grounded, steady, matter of fact way.
Air-Reacts by thinking first then acts according to evalua-
tion, expression of thoughts to feel right.
Water-Reaction colored by emotional intensity.
Fire-Reaction with enthusiasm and direct action; leap
before look.
```
```
Chiron in:
Earth-Finding means for accomplishment.
Air-Anticipation of the future. Restless to the constraints
of the present.
Water-Mystical quest, devotion to a matter.
Fire-Independence and self-sufficiency.
```
```
Saturn in:
Earth-Stabilizing eff~ciency.
Air-Stabilizing of understanding.
Water-Overly sensitive, emotional repression.
Fire-Stabilizing identity.
```

244 Part III-Book of Water

Jupiter in:
Earth-Spontaneous flow of practical application.
Air-Spontaneous flow of mental application.
Water-Spontaneous flow of emotion and intuition.
Fire-Spontaneous flow of energy.

The Sun in any element is energy which feeds the basic
sense of purpose.
Uranus in any element shows individualistic freedom, inde-
pendence, originality.
Neptune in any element shows the intangible having an
effect, and freedom from ego-self.
Pluto in any element shows transformation.

The Squares and Their Influences

As you are aware at this point, each square on the Enochian
chessboard has symbols associated with it, and these symbols
have specific meanings. These symbols are in fact representa-
tive of the influences and forces put into action when the chess
pieces are moved onto the squares. Therefore, you must observe
how the pieces react in the squares. In doing this, you will be
seeing planets and archetypes in the Zodiac and houses, so you
will be looking at:

1. The Zodiacal influence of the square to the situation being
    divined. (See Table IX on the opposite page.)
2. The area of life under influence, depicted by the house, as
    given in the earlier chapter on finding the Ptah Square.
3. Combinations of these influences between chess pieces
and how their specific energies activate the squares.


```
Analyzing a Divination Game 245
```
```
TABLE IX-ZODIACAL INFLUENCES
```
```
Sign
```
Aries

```
Taurus
```
```
Gemini
```
```
Cancer
```
```
Leo
```
```
Virgo
```
```
Influence (in general)
Enthusiasm, energetic, proud, excitable, hasty,
expedient, aggressive, courage, independent,
competitive, self-willed, frank, outspoken,
organizer, leader, fearless and aspiring, clever.
The destiny of this sign is to Truth.
Lethargy, self-indulgence, domestic, patient,
steadfast, conservative, brooding, stubborn,
discriminating, trustworthy, acquisitiveness,
secret, cosmic law, practical, capable. The des-
tiny of this sign is to Obedience.
Humane, changeable, eloquent, sensitive, dex-
trous, inventive, democratic, analytical, super-
ficial, restlessness, mental tension, reasoning,
nervousness, communicative, impulsive, diffu-
sive. The destiny of this sign is to Motive.
Impressionable, psychic, imaginative, intu-
itive, domestic, self-sacrificing, versatile,
reserved, artistic, sensitive, maternal, fanci-
ful, romantic, highly emotional, tenacity, seek
to be individualized, self-possessed and self-
reliant. The destiny of this sign is to Power.
Ambitious, optimistic, challenging, generosity,
affectionate, idealistic, vain, illusory, autocrat-
ic, forceful, highly magnetic, ruling, love,
impulsive to desire, firm, self-controlling,
earnest. The destiny of this sign is to Harmony
Studious, ingenious, dextrous, methodical,
skeptical, analytical, self-centered, service to
others, melancholy, petty, recuperative, criti-
cal, materialistic, discriminative, retiring,
ingenious, adaptable. The destiny of this sign
is to Discrimination.
```

246 Part IU-Book of Water

```
TABLE IX-ZODIACAL INFLUENCES (CONTINUED)
```
```
Sign
Libra
```
```
Scorpio
```
```
Sagittarius
```
```
Capricorn
```
```
Aquarius
```
```
Pisces
```
-
Influence (in general)

```
Egotism, changeable, romantic, imitative, tact-
ful, fond of show, materialistic, jealousy, persua-
sive, seeks equilibrium, intuitive, amenable,
inspirational and perceptive, compassionate.
The destiny of this sign is to Balance.
Altruistic, penetrating, temperamental, sar-
castic, imaginative, revengeful, secretive,
emotional extremes, scientific, uncompromis-
ing, sensuality, judgmental, dignified, affable,
courteous, determined, reserved, tenacious.
The destiny of this sign is to Regeneration.
Progressive, frank, philosophic, ambition,
adventurous, jovial, amiable, idealistic,
impersonal, petulant, irritable, exacting, pur-
suing higher thoughts, ideals, frank, honest,
prophetic, liberty, impressionable. The des-
tiny of this sign is Law.
Inhibition, unforgiving, cold, concentrative,
domineering, thinker, fatalistic, moody, calcu-
lating, industrious, arduous, self-conscious,
avaricious, deceptive, calm, contemplation.
The destiny of this sign is Service.
Intellectual, independent, profound, viva-
cious, gentle, changeable, unconventional,
temperamental, worrying, honest, integrity,
studious, thoughtful, imaginative, discrimina-
tive. The destiny of this sign is Humanity.
Repressed, sensitive, impressionable, devoted,
melancholic, introspective, lacking confidence,
emotional, chameleon, self-esteem or approba-
tion, sensationalist, traveler, medium, fastidious,
psychic. The destiny of this sign is Spirituality.
```

```
Analyzing a Divination Game 247
```
There are also the geomantic vibrations that are put into
action when the chess pieces move over the chessboard. The
geomantic influence will show the more earthly, mundane
result to the matter being divined.
In the diagrams of the chessboards (figs. 32-35 on pages
22-25), you see in each square a geomantic symbol associated
with that square. You will also note that each angle of each
board repeats the 16 geomantic figures. Table X (pages 248-9)
shows the geomantic figures and gives the names applied to
them and their association^.^ In Table XI (pages 250-2651, the
basic influence of these figures in each of the elemental angles
of all four Enochian chessboards is shown. The meanings given
in this table are only general influences and are to be reversed,
balanced or emphasized, depending on the circumstances of the
piece influencing the square in question.

1. For more detailed study on this subject, read The Oracle of Geomancy by
Stephen Skinner, Divination by Geomancy by Stephen Skinner, A Practical
Guide to Geomantic Divination by Israel Regardie and The Golden Dawn, vol.
4, bk. 8, by Israel Regardie.


```
Zodiac Sign
Aries
```
```
Taurus
```
```
Gemini
```
```
Cancer
```
```
Leo
```
```
Virgo
```
```
Libra
```
```
Scorpio
```
```
Element
Fire
```
```
Earth
```
```
Air
```
```
Water
```
```
Fire
```
```
Earth
```
```
Air
```
```
Water
```
```
Meaning
```
```
BOY
```
```
Loss
```
```
White
```
```
People
```
```
Greater fortune
```
```
Conjunction
```
```
Girl
```
```
Red
```
Figure Planet

```
Mars
```
```
Venus
```
```
Mercury
```
```
Moon
```
```
Sun
```
```
Mercury
```
```
Venus
```
```
Mars
```
```
Name
Puer
```
```
Amissio
```
```
Albus
```
```
Populus
```
```
Fortuna Major
```
```
Conjunctio
```
```
Puella
```
```
Rubeus
```

```
TABLE X---GEOMANTIC FIGURES AND ASSOCIATIONS (continued)
```
Figure

..
   .
- •
.
.
..
..
.
..
..
- •
.
.
. a
- •
..
.
-
-
- •
..
-
-
-
.
.
-.
..
..
.
..
..

```
Name
Acquisitio
```
```
Carcer
```
```
Tristitia
```
```
Laetitia
```
```
Cauda Draconis
```
```
Caput Draconis
```
```
Fortuna minor
```
```
Via
```
```
Meaning
Acquisition
```
```
Prison
```
```
Sadness
```
```
JOY
```
```
Tail of the
dragon
```
```
Head of the
dragon
```
```
Lesser fortune
```
```
way
```
```
Element
Fire
```
```
Earth
```
```
Air
```
```
Water
```
```
Fire
```
```
Earth
```
```
Fire
```
```
Water
```
```
Planet
Jupiter
```
```
Saturn
```
```
Saturn
```
```
Jupiter
```
```
Saturn
and Mars
```
```
Venus and
Jupiter
```
```
Sun
```
```
Moon
```
```
Zodiac Sign
Sagittarius
```
```
Capricorn
```
```
Aquarius
```
```
Pisces
```
```
Cauda
draconis
Caput
draconis
```
```
Leo
```
```
Cancer
```

250 Part 111-Book of Water

```
TABLE XI-GEOMANTIC INFLUENCES IN THE ELEMENTAL ANGLES
OF THE ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS
```
```
Fire Board, Fire
```
```
Via
```
```
Acquisitio
Puella
```
```
Conjunctio
```
```
Tristitia
```
```
Albus
```
```
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
```
```
Fortuna Minor
```
```
Cauda Draconis
```
```
Rubeus
```
```
Laetitia
```
```
Carcer
Puer
Amissio
Populus
```
```
Angle
```
```
The love is great, but will cause great
jealousy.
A sincere love from an upright heart.
This personlsituation is whimsical and
changeable.
He or she wishes to be yours this
moment.
Await the time and you will find the
results great.
You can trust this person's actions to be
true to his or her heart.
The person loves you sincerely.
The person has a great love for you but
wishes to conceal it.
You had better decline any offer, for it is
neither constant nor true.
This action comes from an upright and
sincere heart.
Decline a situation which may be your
destruction.
You lovelregard a person who does not
speak well of you.
Their love/motive is false to you.
This is true and constant; forsake it not.
Avoid this situation.
This is from the heart and will continue
until death.
```

```
Analyzing a Divination Game 251
```
TABLE XI-GEOMANTIC INFLUENCES IN THE ELEMENTAL ANGLES
OF THE ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS (CONTINUED)

```
Fire Board, Water Angle
```
```
Via
```
```
Acquisitio
```
```
Puella
```
```
Conjunctio
```
```
Tristitia
```
```
Albus
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
Laetitia
Carcer
Puer
Amissio
Populus
```
```
What you wish for, you will shortly
obtain.
Whatever your desires are, for the pre-
sent decline them.
If you are not extravagant, your efforts
will be rewarded.
You may have distress if you do not alter
your attitude or intentions.
You may obtain your wishes by means of
a friend.
Your efforts are in vain. Time to wait.
No.
Yes.
The direction to go will not be obstructed.
Change your tactics and you will do well.
Success.
You will quickly obtain what you want.
Be happy with what you have achieved.
This is not the time to expect success.
Requests will be granted.
It is someone else's turn for success.
```

252 Part III-Book of Water

```
TABLE XI---GEOMANTIC INFLUENCES IN THE ELEMENTAL ANGLES
OF THE ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS (CONTINUED)
```
```
Fire Board, Air
```
```
Via
Acquisitio
```
```
Puella
Conjunctio
```
```
Tristitia
```
```
Albus
```
```
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
Fortuna Minor
```
```
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
Laetitia
```
```
Carcer
```
```
Puer
```
```
Amissio
```
```
Populus
```
```
Angle
```
```
You will obtain better luck elsewhere.
Remain among your friends and you will
do well.
There is gain in foreign areas.
Remain with what you know and you will
avoid difficulties.
It is safe to move on and make your
intentions known.
Stay with those of like mind and there
will be no opposition.
Travel out and enjoy yourself.
Success in ventures and relationships.
If you plan ahead you will succeed as you
desire.
While traveling watch out for evil people.
A stranger may enhance your fortune.
Draw upon your current resources, rely
only upon those you know and trust.
You can dwell abroad with comfort and
happiness.
This is not a time to move forward or
make new contacts.
Be prepared for changes and people
changing their tactics.
Travel in groups. It is a majority decision.
```
-


```
Analyzing a Divination Game 253
```
TABLE XI-XEOMANTIC INFLUENCES IN THE ELEMENTAL ANGLES
OF THE ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS (CONTINUED)

```
Fire Board, Earth
```
```
Via
```
Acquisitio

```
Puella
Conjunctio
Tristitia
Albus
```
```
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
```
```
Laetitia
Carcer
Puer
```
Amissio

```
Populus
```
```
Angle
```
```
You will meet an attractive person.
A prosperous partnerlacquaintance influ-
ences the situation.
A virtuous person may be influenced.
Marriage and respectability.
There is wealth in a situation.
This persodsituation may be of help but
is very volatile.
It is profitable to enter into a matter.
Success is to be expected.
Only partial success.
There is honesty but no wealth.
This situatiodperson could be self-
destructing.
A worthy undertaking and good fortune.
With integrity you may succeed.
There is a union with an equal.
An uncomfortable union.
There is difficulty in co-operation from
others.
```

```
254 Part 111-Book of Water
```
```
Water Board, Fire Angle
```
```
Via
```
```
Acquisitio
Puella
Conjunctio
Tristitia
Albus
```
```
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
Laetitia
```
Carcer
Puer
Amissio
Populus
i

```
What has gone will not return as soon as
expected.
There is no return.
An unexpected happening.
Circumstances delay a situation.
Answers come bringing joy.
There is absence of an essential itedper-
son, preventing a full result.
An abundance of help is given.
Success will depend on one's conduct.
Matters come about slowly.
This is a no-win situation.
Watch for illness, as it may delay.
Stranger(s) will come and influence the
end result.
There is joy in order.
There is another love elsewhere.
Unforeseen circumstances cause a delay.
Gatherings of friends.
```

```
Analyzing a Divination Game 255
```
```
Water Board, Water
```
Via

Acquisitio

```
Puella
Conjunctio
```
```
Tristitia
```
```
Albus
```
```
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
```
```
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
```
```
Rubeus
```
```
Laetitia
Carcer
Puer
Amissio
Populus
```
```
Angle
```
```
Happiness between people.
Trouble and sorrow.
Someone may do you a favor.
There is plenty for everyone. There may
be a wedding.
To accomplish your pursuits, you must
first clear the obstacles.
There are others who will endeavor to
obstruct you.
Be prepared for sadness and danger.
You will soon be away from the influence
of your enemies.
There is a change for the better.
Misfortune threatens you, but it can be
prevented.
You may be out of your depth. Watch for
deceit.
You will get money.
There may be sexual involvement.
Sorrow will depart.
Matters begin to grow and improve.
Be very careful and matters may go
wrong.
```

256 Part IU-Book of Water

```
TABLE XI--GEOMANTIC INFLUENCES IN THE ELEMENTAL ANGLES
OF THE ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS (CONTINUED)
```
```
Water Board, Air Angle
```
```
Via
```
```
Acquisitio
Puella
Conjunctio
Tristitia
Albus
```
```
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
```
```
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
```
```
Rubeus
Laetitia
Carcer
Puer
Amissio
Populus
```
```
The situation may improve, but only for
a short while.
Circumstances are doubtful.
There is lasting recovery.
Be prepared for the worst.
Prepare for change while you can.
Matters of the Spirit become of impor-
tance.
Good health is expected.
It is doubtful as to whether one's
healthlsituation will recover.
There is now no danger.
It is time to enter into an activity that
will improve your health.
Forces beyond our control are at work.
Relief from difficulties.
Religious convictions.
A situation will be finished or left.
Time to make improvements.
Support from others is necessary.
```

```
Analyzing a Divination Game 257
```
TABLE XI-GEOMANTIC INFLUENCES IN THE ELEMENTAL ANGLES
OF THE ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS (CONTINUED)

Water Board, Earth Angle

```
Via
```
```
Acquisitio
Puella
Conjunctio
```
```
Tristitia
Albus
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
```
```
Fortuna Minor
```
```
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
Laetitia
Carcer
```
```
Puer
Amissio
Populus
```
```
Commence your travels, as others will
attend to matters as you wish.
Too many things need doing first.
You will be prosperous on a journey.
Unless you can be assisted, you might
not succeed.
Any move now will be an advancement.
Your answer comes from within.
Be confident and you will proceed safely.
Home and security become of impor-
tance.
Make your intentions known and take a
step forward.
Turn down any offers for now.
There is protection in your travels.
Your efforts are in vain.
Be prudent in your endeavors and you
will prosper.
Watch out for danger from another.
Proceed with caution.
There may be a short journey.
```

258 Part Ill--Book of Water

```
TABLE XI~EOMANTIC INFLUENCES IN THE ELEMENTAL ANGLES
OF THE ENOC:HIAN CHESSBOARDS (CONTINUED)
```
```
Air Board, Fire Angle
```
```
Via
Acquisitio
Puella
Conjunctio
Tristitia
```
```
Albus
```
```
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
```
```
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
Laetitia
Carcer
Puer
Amissio
Populus
```
```
There is a son, wealth and honor.
There is a daughter.
This personlsituation will endure.
Two people may influence the situation.
This is time to be forward and not back-
ward.
Although attractive, this person is
annoying.
Going out to learn-education.
Pay attention to these circumstances; if
overlooked there may be trouble.
Your children will be dutiful.
This person will honor and respect you.
You will have what you want.
This situation is weak and may not last.
The situation is healthy and contained.
Refine your manner.
Reproduction.
Children.
```

```
Analyzing a Divination Game 259
```
TABLE XI-GEOMANTIC INFLUENCES IN THE ELEMENTAL ANGLES
OF THE ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS (CONTINUED)

```
Air Board, Water Angle
```
```
Via
Acquisitio
```
```
Puella
```
```
Conjunctio
```
```
Tristitia
```
```
Albus
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
```
```
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
Laetitia
Carcer
Puer
Amissio
Populus
```
```
Others may beat you to the mark.
Everything comes at once; you will need
help.
It is meant for you to be happy and suc-
cessful.
There is no luck. Success only through
effort.
You are being held back from success at
present.
Trust in destiny.
Your expectations are vain.
Be careful; your fortune may be changed
into misfortune.
Keep trying; you will succeed.
You may meet sorrow and trouble.
It will work out better than expected.
Success.
Difficult times are leaving.
Depend on your merit and integrity.
Success is coming, be patient.
Misfortune through others.
```

260 Part Ill-Book of Water

```
Air Board, Air Angle
```
```
Via
```
```
Acquisitio
Puella
Conjunctio
```
```
Tristitia
Mbus
Caput Draconis
```
```
Fortuna Major
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
Laetitia
Carcer
Puer
```
```
Amissio
```
```
This person exceeds all others in every
respect.
The one close to you pretends.
There is sincerity between people.
Plan everything carefully and don't rely
on others.
This person can be relied on.
Watch your back.
This person is sincere while there is gain
for him or her.
Secret enemy.
Valuable friend.
There is inconsistency and deceit.
Brothers in arms.
There is ruthlessness in business.
Ideas must be put into perspective.
There are double meanings to every-
thing.
Respect this situation; it operates accord-
ing to true will.
Populus Cause for sorrow if you are completely
trusting.
```

```
Analyzing a Divination Game 261
```
TABLE XI-GEOMANTIC INFLUENCES IN THE ELEMENTAL ANGLES
OF THE ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS (CONTINUED)

Air Board, Earth Angle

```
Via
Acquisitio
Puella
Conjunctio
```
```
Tristitia
Albus
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
```
```
Fortuna Minor
```
```
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
Laetitia
```
```
Carcer
Puer
Amissio
Populus
```
```
This day will bring increase of happiness.
This day is not very lucky.
You will be safe if careful.
Think for everyone else to avoid misfor-
tune, as they are not thinking clearly.
Prepare everything carefully.
Do not act now; draw up your plans first.
Beware-there is opposition.
Change your plans for today to avoid bad
luck.
It may be difficult to escape problems
today.
Cheer up; matters are getting better.
Avoid arguments.
Be reconciled; your circumstances will
shortly mend.
In spite of obstacles, you should do well.
It will all work in your favor.
Success is almost near.
Gatherings of people can bring misfor-
tune.
```

262 Part III-Book of Water

```
Earth Board, Fire Angle
```
```
Via
Acquisitio
Puella
Conjunctio
Tristitia
Albus
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
```
```
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
Laetitia
Carcer
Puer
Arnissio
```
```
Populus
```
```
Release from restriction.
Releasing the hold of others over you.
Suffer now, honor later.
Death of a matter-sorrow.
With great struggle there is a small gain.
There may be no freedom in this matter.
Breaking free.
Sorrow and anxiety are great, and answers
are uncertain.
Liberty and freedom.
The sacrifice may be too great this time.
After a long ordeal there will be success.
Answers come soon.
A prisoner.
Another may limit your movements.
There are those who will show compas-
sion.
The people will have a say in this matter.
```

```
Analyzing a Divination Game 263
```
TABLE XI--GEOMANTIC INFLUENCES IN THE ELEMENTAL ANGLES
OF THE ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS (CONTINUED)

```
Earth Board, Water Angle
```
```
Via
```
```
Acquisitio
Puella
Conjunctio
```
```
Tristitia
```
```
Albus
```
```
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
Laetitia
Carcer
Puer
Amissio
```
```
Populus
```
```
By perseverance, you will recover the sit-
uation.
Bear your loss with fortitude.
You property or possessions may be lost.
You may recover stolen property through
the efforts of another.
Those who have done wrong will be pun-
ished.
Although you may lose, the other party
may suffer the most.
Property is found; there is gain.
The odds against you are too great.
These odds can be overcome.
The end of a matter.
Work alone in this matter.
Wait.
The authorities intervene.
Do not expect to regain the past.
You may succeed, but this will be
through trouble and expense.
An organization or group of people has
an influence.
```

264 Part III-Book of Water

```
Earth Board, Air Angle
```
```
Via
```
```
Acquisitio
Puella
Conjunctio
Tristitia
Albus
Caput Draconis
```
```
Fortuna Major
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
```
```
Rubeus
```
```
Laetitia
```
```
Career
Puer
Amissio
```
```
Populus
```
```
Through careful thought you can find
some answers.
Relationships may not work.
Prosperity.
It is not time for gain.
Do not delay-happiness.
It is time to move fast to achieve results.
By entering into an agreement, your hap-
piness will be ensured.
This may be more than you can handle.
All will work out well.
Do not enter into any agreement, as it
will not last.
This is a union which will add to your
welfare.
This situation may bring poverty. Be dis-
crete.
Your peace may be destroyed.
Work alone; you need your freedom.
If you wish to be happy, do not marry this
person.
This course of direction will not answer
your expectations.
```

```
Analyzing a Divination Game 265
```
```
TABLE XI-GEOMANTIC INFLUENCES IN THE ELEMENTAL ANGLES
OF THE ENOCHIAN CHESSBOARDS (CONTINUED)
```
In addition to the foregoing influences in the squares, you
must not forget the Tarot and elemental associations, although
these would be the last things to consider. The other associa-
tions tend to cover the general meanings that the Tarot and ele-
ments can provide.

```
Earth Board, Earth Angle
```
```
Via
Acquisitio
Puella
Conjunctio
Tristitia
Albus
Caput Draconis
Fortuna Major
Fortuna Minor
Cauda Draconis
Rubeus
Laetitia
Career
Puer
```
```
Amissio
Populus
```
```
Great gain.
Doubling your success.
What you seek you will receive.
Great fortune is coming; be patient.
Loss.
Decline any offers and you will be okay.
Be faithful.
Time to put more work into a matter.
Success will be trivial.
Tie up loose ends first.
Unexpected gain.
Someone may cheat you.
Be happy; prosperity is assured.
Deal fairly with others and they will
repay your efforts.
Providence will support good causes.
Be wise and careful. If it is for the gain of
the people, it will be successful.
```

266 Part IU-Book of Water

Divining the Timing of Events

?'o foretell how long a matter will take place, depicted by a divina-
tion game, is very difficult. The following methods may be of help.

1. The elements: Fire = very swift, Air = swift, Water = mod-
    erate speed, Earth = slow.
2. The triplicities: The Cardinal signs (Aries, Cancer, Libra
and Capricorn) show matters moving rapidly with great
power-hours or days. The Fixed signs (Taurus, Scorpio,
Aquarius and Leo) show matters that endure-months or
years. The Mutable signs (Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and
Pisces) show fluctuation in times, not so quick but not
enduring-days to weeks.
3. You can time when attacking forces will be weakest or
strongest according to current celestial planetary tran-
sits, concentrating on the astrological symbols.
4. No-move dice throws as in Rule 17.3.
5. Relate the planetary movement to the querent's natal
horoscope and plot the movement through the natal hous-
es. Although an actual planet may be in a sign for many
days, months or years, the signs move through the hous-
es every two hours throughout a day (24-hour period). In
view of this, one could calculate when a sign that holds a
particular planet passes through a specific house on a
specific day. I would not advise that this method be
attempted by those not adept at astrology.

Direct, Indirect Action

Direct action is obvious, as when you see a piece move and
directly threaten, defend or capture another piece. Indirect
action is seen when a piece is the instigator or collaborator in
causing difficulty to an opponent but does not itself bring out
the direct action. These actions on the chessboards are also
reflected in daily life, in situations affecting the querent or his
or her question.


```
Analyzing a Divination Game 267
```
Signif icaf or
It is reasonably clear at this point that the querent's King and
the Ptah Square and Ptah are significators in their own right.
The King is representative of the most spiritual aspect of the
querent, dealing with the querent's self-awareness, or just
awareness. It is the Sun of the querent and is the power of cre-
ative self-expression.
The Ptah Square has already been discussed, so I will not go
any further into that subject, other than to say that the combi-
nation of the querent's King and the Ptah Square in the last
round of play gives a "nowness" to each new moment. It is a way
in which one actively merges with life in the outer and inner
worlds, and an aspect of personal destiny.
In all readings, however, there must be one other chess piece
that will act as a Significator and represent the querent or
question "in the material." Any action of or to that piece should
be observed by the diviner as an incident of great importance.
In fact, the Significator is of next most importance after the
querent's King.
The Significator can be found in many ways, all of which you
should be able to identify through the previous reference text
and tables; that is, by:

1. The planetary nature of the divination question
2. Archetypelpersonality of querent, if querent is to play a
major role in the events
3. Archetypelpersonality of the person concerned in the div-
ination
4. Planetary ruler of the person's ascendent (from his or her
horoscope)
5. Planetary ruler of the houselsign to which the question
relates
6. Chess piece most representative of the matter in hand


268 Part III-Book of Water

Chess Piece Relationships and Movements

Throughout the game, chess pieces will be influencing each
other either beneficially or negatively. These relationships
become important points in your divination analysis, for these
relationships describe the type of dynamism or harmony in the
matter concerned.
Ideal relationships are energy releasing and form maintain-
ing. Such effects between chess pieces create a synthesis of com-
plementary energy. Let us look at some of these.
Take the energy release of a dynamic relationship, for exam-
ple. This occurs when allied pieces cover (protect) each other
and both (or one, that of the querent) is placed in a cardinal-
sign square. This would signify, modified by the nature of the
pieces and squares involved, restlessness, tremendous urges
towards action, starting new activities andlor pursuing a defi-
nite direction. If this relationship is between one of the quer-
ent's pieces (or one of his or her ally's pieces) that sits in a
cardinal square and an opponent piece on another square, and
neither captures the other, it would depict a crisis or issue being
faced but not resolved. How the pieces move after that moment
shows how the matter will be dealt with.
If one of the querent's or ally's pieces is on a fixed sign and
shows some form of a protecting or threatening relationship
with another friendly piece, this would describe deeply
ingrained habit patterns, extremely concentrated power or
stubborn willfulness. If the relationship is with an opponent's
piece, however, it would show energy beginning to flow, opening
up a wide range of capabilities, and determination that may
bring matters to a conclusion.
Mutable signs would show energy release through mental
channels, with the input of other factors to a situation, and a
need for change and new things.
Where a piece blocks another from movement, restrictions
are placed on a matter. Where blocks are purposeful to protect a
piece, it alludes to the nature of its actual action.


```
Analyzing a Divination Game 269
```
When a chess piece is captured and taken off the board, you
must observe the type of piece that is captured together with
what piece captured it, what strength the piece held before its
capture and any effects caused by removing the captured piece
from the board. For example, if your ally removed an opponent
piece, you would understand in your divination that some help
is being given. If your ally loses its piece through capture in its
attempt to help you, your help is being eliminated. If your own
pieces are caught where, if the throw of die had been different,
help could have come, it may show that people or circumstances
turned against you, or that the forces in a situation lose the
power to work to your advantage.
A King capture of any King except that of the querent shows
the removal of powerful forces that may have been for or
against the querent. If the querent's King is captured, the quer-
ent would have been unsuccessful in his or her efforts, or per-
haps changed his or her mind. The results are all very
dependent upon what is happening in the game.
Circumstances are realized when a piece captures another
but does not get captured itself, usually in the querent's favor if
a querent or ally piece is the captor.
When a querent or ally piece captures an opponent piece,
landing on the square whereupon the opponent sits, it shows
the culmination of a point or matter within the divination, or
the removal of a factor. It may show a new move or factor enter-
ing a situation. New impulses are carried out in previous activ-
ities. The importance or unimportance of the factor would
depend on the context of the whole game.
If any opponent piece captures a querent's piece or an ally's
piece, a situation arises where there is an inability to compro-
mise, a painful reaction to criticism or a case of revealed vul-
nerability. The reaction thereof, and to what, would depend on
the pieces and squares involved. It is a very tense situation
when a piece threatens a capture but finds that its target is pro-
tected by one or more pieces.
A risky venture or questionable behavior pattern is recog-
nized when a piece willfully moves into danger of being cap-


270 Part Ill-Book of Water

tured. But, if forced to move into such a position, the situation
is not risky or questionable. Factors beyond one's control do not
work in favor of the querent. It shows dissatisfaction, unease, a
time to meet and assimilate experiences.
If a querent's or ally's piece moves into a position where it
threatens another piece but finds itself also threatened by that
piece, or by another piece, it shows the querent (or the divined
matter) moving into areas without foresight or where there is a
lack of control. If the opponents find themselves in any diEcul-
ty, the reverse occurs, where the situation turns in favor of the
querent: it shows opposing elements making mistakes or having
weaknesses.
Where the game play flows with ease and without conflict,
hope is built for conditions; beneficial influences and sponta-
neous activity are shown. Where the game play flows with ease
but with some conflict or obstruction, it shows the formation of
matters wherein advantage can be taken of environmental
opportunities for growth and development. This can also hap-
pen when a piece or pieces of the same element moves into
squares that cover a threatened ally, or a piece of the same ele-
ment. This is a relationship of creativity.
Pieces withdrawing from a difficult matter where they are
the aggressors show willful removal of force. Where they are the
victims, it shows a timely retreat or maneuver. Where it was an
advancing piece or a piece strategically placed that withdrew, it
shows delays in a matter, or matters which must be considered
more carefully before any action takes place.
As you can see from the examples above, the reading of cir-
cumstances is very easy, because they can be likened to the
actual events on the chessboard during divination play.
In the divination game, from a planetary perspective, the
above also applies. A piece that threatens or acts as the aggres-
sor is usually representative of the planet affecting matters as
a dominating influence, and the associations of the square it
occupies are therefore also applied.
When houses such as the first, second, third, tenth, eleventh
and twelfth predominate, you will see more personal and self-


```
Analyzing a Divination Game 271
```
determined activities. When the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh,
eighth and ninth houses predominate, you will find activities
may be influenced by others in some way.
Queen moves usually show definite events, especially when
a Queen moves from one element to another. The elemental
angles will also have an influence on your divination game. Fire
shows matters of action, and Water shows reflection, emotion
and reaction. Air shows planning, relationships and changes,
while Earth shows awareness of immediate concerns, work and
the practical formation of matters.
Table VII (page 241) shows the planetary strengths and
weaknesses. Look at the piece that is influenced by the sign of
the square where your piece sits, whether rulership, exaltation,
detriment or fall. If the first piece affects the sign of the other
piece in any manner, you will be able to tell how much influence
your piece has in a situation. If the affecting piece rules or is
exalted in the sign, your chess piece sits in good relationship
with the other piece and the effect is harmonious and strong. If
in detriment or fall, the effect is harmonious but weak. If, how-
ever, the relationship is threatening, the strength or weakness of
the situation can be determined by the planetary influence of the
sign of the square which your piece occupies. Your own piece's
influence on that sign must also be taken into consideration.
For example, using the planetary and Zodiacal associations: a
Mars piece in a Capricorn square threatened by a Saturn piece
shows that caution and reserve will be overruled in a matter.
This is because Mars is exalted in Capricorn and Saturn rules
Capricorn, which brings more strength to the situation and there-
fore a greater struggle. It would also show, if for example Saturn
were in an Aries square, a tendency for two people to quarrel.



Divination

Example

# Q

uestion: Will Russia revert to a type of democracy by or
before the year 2005?1
Board used: Air Board
Play setting: Water of Air
Ptah Square: Capricorn-W4c
Game played: 23 Nov 1989
(Where there is a number followed by a dash, this shows the
die number thrown but indicates "No Move.")

1. This game was played November 23,1989. During the three years this book
was at the publisher, events have overtaken the question: the independence of
the Soviet Union satellite countries, the unification of Germany, and the oust-
ing of Gorbachev as leader in Russia. Considering the attempted coup in 1993,
the chess divination game as given here has been analyzing prophetically.


```
2 74 Part IU-Book of Water
```
```
W
N3c
3-
Plc
NF4d
NA3dxAP
Blb
K2a
P3c
K3b
B3d
BA3axAR
NF4dxP
R2a
BF2d
K4c: Ptah
```
```
F
N3c
Plc
P4c
R4a
Q3a
P4d
P2c
Pld
Qlc
Q3a
Blb
5-
NW4bxP
K2b
NW2axR
```
```
E
P3c
NA3d
P2c
Plc
P2d
R3b
Q3a
PF4axFR
2-
Blb
R2b
PF3bxP
RF4b
RF4a
P3d
```
```
A
3-
P4c
N3c
P3dxEN
Plc
Blb
K2a
P2c
N4a
Q3c
5-
P2d
QE4c
QF4dxWN+
NW2c
```
The answer appears to be "successful," but in view of the
fact that pieces, both ally and opposition, still advanced and
threatened and captured other pieces, one could assume that
Russia will not fully achieve such a result within the time frame
given. They will still be coping with friction and having to work
on what was spoiled. Drawing to the end of this time span, a
strong emphasis was placed in the game on Pisces and the 12th
house: possible assassinations, unseen dangers, the populace
looking to spiritual matters and religion, matters of the growth
of society as a whole being of prime concern and hidden ene-
mies; i.e., the "underground."
In the last moves, the Saturn influence in Aquarius (Earth
Rook's pawn on E3d) is under tension from a Fire Moon influ-
ence in Aquarius (Fire Queen's pawn). Because these are pawns,
you would look at the masses rather than individuals, and with
the Aquarius influence, fulfillment of society's ideals, political
and otherwise, come to the foreground. This all happens very
slowly as government reform (Capricorn and 10th house), struc-
ture, service and labor is attended to, along with the health and
well-being of the people (Air's last move of the Knight into a
Virgo square, 6th house, from the Air Angle to the Water Angle).


```
Divination Example 2 75
```
The game moved relatively fast, however, with few "No
Moves" to show time delays over the decade and a half. With
this, one can assume that the final move of this game happens
before the given date.2
Judging by the way the pieces are positioned at the end of the
game, there will still be many restrictions imposed on the people
and the country. Air's last move of Jupiter into Virgo, from Air to
Water, showed erratic use of the armed forces. Or perhaps it may
be describing the Jovian tendency to expansiveness conflicting
with the Virgo influence of concentration on the part, and detail.
This conflict may result in either overdoing matters or some
improper treatment of some aspect of the matter. Employment
may be unstable at this point due to people having more freedom
to choose. Many may drift from one job to another. Disagreements
may erupt. It appears that Russia will not be out of trouble yet.
From a general but nonrestrictive view, the Fire Angle rep-
resents the Kremlin and possibly the armed forces. The Air
Angle represents the Communist Party, or perhaps allied forces
of some kind. The Water Angle may represent the people, and
authorities favoring the change, while the Earth Angle repre-
sents the economy and those in favor of the changeover who
may be outside influences. Observe the Earth Bishop's pawn
and how it penetrates the Kremlin, opening up for the Earth
Rook and also eliminating some minor would-be opposition.
Most of the encounters throughout the game were handled
directly and seemed very final. This could allude to the han-
dling of satellite Eastern Bloc countries that will continue to
turn away from Communism.
The Significator (the Water Knight) may represent Gorbachev,
who played a direct role in solving problems effectively in his com-
munications with the people (pawns). As shown a few months
after this game was played, he tried to obtain a multiparty democ-
racy, which was voted in. However, at the time of this writing, this
multiparty democracy in Russia was yet to be proved as a working
structure. Also, Gorbachev is removed before the final result by

2. This had in fact started to take place only months after my analysis of the
game when the single-party system was voted out.


```
276 Part 111-Book of Water
```
the Air Queen. The Queen also checks the Water King in that
move, so this move and the loss of the Water Knight jeopardizes
Russia's move into democracy. Taking into account the Queen's
symbology, she could represent more than one possibility. One
thing is for sure, though: the Air Queen has great significance. In
a later divination game I played concerning Gorbachev, that same
piece eliminated the querent7s King, which in that particular case
represented Gorbachev himself. That elimination stopped the
game, showing that Gorbachev would not live or remain in power
long enough to see the full results of his work.
Moves 5 and 8 show significant gains in some parts of Rus-
sia, perhaps satellite countries moving out of Communism.
These moves could be showing gradual political changes in the
satellite countries in the late 1980s to mid 1990s. Take for
example East Germany's exploits, which may be described in
the first few moves of the game. Throughout the game, it is
clearly evident that the "people" seem to be controlling or tak-
ing a more active part in their country's politics.
At the time of writing this analysis, there had been conflicts
between the Azerbaijans and Armenians. These, perhaps, are
described by move 4, where the people take aggressive action
(Mars moves from Water to the Fire Angle) for protection of
their land and homes (Cancer square). The religious difficulties
are shown by the Earth move of Chiron7s pawn into a Libra
square, putting it under a direct threat from Fire/Saturn7s pawn
in Scorpio. The Fire and Air moves show the Kremlin's reaction
(Moon in Aquarius), where it sympathizes with the needs of
humanity but in an impersonal manner. The Moon in Aquarius
influence also shows the need of the people for freedom at any
cost. Azerbaijan, by the way, is under the rule of Aquarius.
To give a fuller analysis of this particular divination question,
I would have to be very familiar with Russia's internal politics,
which I do not claim to be. Therefore, I will leave it up to the
reader to look into this and compare what has happened since the
writing of this text with the results of the divination game.
This of course poses an important point. To do a thorough
analysis of an Enochian chess divination game, one would have
to have a deep understanding of the subject matter of the "ques-
tion"; for example, the subject of internal politics as above.


Part IV

Book of Fire

Training of the Adept



And in

the Beginning

I

```
n the Order of the Golden Dawn, once an initiate is put
through the 5=6 grade, he or she will have become a member
of the R.R. et A.C. and will be considered an adept. By this
time, the adept will have been totally exposed to the
Enochian Tablets and Tablet of Union and is ready to work with
and learn Enochian magic. Within the system of Enochian
magic is the magical system of Enochian chess. Up to this point
in this book, you have learned the technical use of the Enochian
chess game, tactically and for divination. These are the first two
stages with which the adept must become familiar before any
magical use of the chessboards and pieces can be discussed.
In this section I will discuss some points about using the
Enochian chess sets and boards in an adept's training of the 5=6
grade of the R.R. et A.C., in addition to game play and divina-
tion. You will appreciate that what you are given here is in fact
```

280 Part IV-Book of Fire

the methodology of magic and of Enochian chess. The real impe-
tus and concepts must come from the individual, and rather
than impose my own magical philosophy on this particular area
I would seriously suggest some experimentation along the lines
of the magical framework to which you are attuned.
Although I have written this book from a Golden Dawn per-
spective, I would actively encourage you to apply and experi-
ment with your own inner concepts in this section of Enochian
chess. If you are a beginner, I suggest you read this section but
do not practice anything given until you have had a good
grounding in occult sciences.
One of the first things an adept is advised when being intro-
duced to Enochian chess is about the effects that playing with the
fully colored boards and chess pieces (god-forms) may have on
individuals. Over years of game play, I found that the Enochian
chessboards affected individual players in different ways. For
example, one player might be weak in playing the Air chess
pieces but strong with the Fire and Water pieces and average
with the Earth pieces. Another player might be strong in Fire,
Air and Water but weak playing the Earth pieces. Various combi-
nations arose in weaknesses and strengths playing one, two or
more elements, no matter how experienced a player was. When
an experienced player played the element angle that he or she
was weak in against an inexperienced player who played the ele-
ment angle that he or she was strong in, it was usually the inex-
perienced player that put the experienced player into difficulty.
After some thought, and inquiry into each individual's natal
astrological chart, I found that their element weaknesses and
strengths that were shown in Enochian chess game play paral-
leled their weakness and strengths in their natal charts. Take
for example one who has no planets or major angles in Earth
signs in her chart. This person would have great difficulty play-
ing the Earth pieces no matter how good she was as a player. As
another example, a person who was weak in the Air and Water
elements in his birth chart: his efforts in playing the Air and
Water Angles were weak compared to his method of play with
the Fire and Earth Angles.


```
And in the Beginning 281
```
I experimented with this concept with the help of those indi-
viduals who played regular Enochian chess games in our Tem-
ple, by encouraging them to frequently play the element in
which they were weakest whenever we got together for our reg-
ular chess games. I also included myself in this experiment.
After a period of time, each individual became stronger in play
until that person's skill in playing the weakest element
matched his or her skill when playing the strongest element.
Now, naturally, you are going to say at this point, "Of course
they would get better; don't we all after enough practice?" The
difference here is, although we all become better players, those
that did not force themselves as frequently as the others to play
their weakest element, still had difficulty in playing that par-
ticular element as effectively as they played the other elements,
irrespective of how experienced they had become in game play.
This strengthening also showed itself in each individual's
daily life activities and psychological make-up, consciously and
unconsciously. This was observed in their own experiences and
by those around them. All influences appeared quite beneficial
in a manner according to the particular element involved for
each individual.
Playing Enochian chess, as seen above, does have a subcon-
scious effect on the players. It is like a state of moving Zen, for
in it you hit different levels of consciousness that can be likened
to states of satori in Zen Buddhism.
The element boards have an even stronger influence on the
players, so you can use the boards in the manner described
above to strengthen an individual. Take for example those who
lack a balance of Water in their natal chart compared to the
other elements. The Water Board will be chosen, and the indi-
vidual will be given the opportunity at different sessions to play
each element on the Water Board. Where a weakness shows, he
or she will repeat with that element until he or she feels
stronger and more balanced.
For example, a weakness may show in the way a person
operates the chess pieces. The pieces may always become bot-
tled up and block each other, or they may be scattered all over


```
282 Part IV-Book of Fire
```
the board, etc. A like weakness may also show in daily life, and
if the individual finds better control throughout daily life, the
strengthening will have taken effect. Remember, however, it is
only considered a weakness (or, for want of a better word, irreg-
ularity) when a player plays obviously out of character with the
set of pieces of a particular element or on a particular board.
I must warn you at this point that, if you have had a partic-
ularly emotional upset in your day, or one from the past that
you have not resolved and find yourself brooding upon, do not
play on the Water Board. You may find yourself out of control
emotionally. The same advice applies to anything excessive, in
activity, emotion or mentalitylpsychology. Do not play on any
element board that emphasizes such a state. The chessboards
emphasize; they do not de-emphasize. Choose a board that will
counter the excess.
For example, if your mind is racing and will not settle,
choose the Earth Board, not the Air Board. If you are depressed,
choose the Fire Board. not the Water Board. If you are upset
and cannot reason a matter out, choose the Air Board, not the
Water or Fire Boards. Apply the same principle with the angle
you play. In severe cases it is best not to get out your Enochian
chess set at all. Leave it until you are calm and have more peace
of mind. The colors of these boards play very subtly on one's
psyche, and it is very easy to further unbalance an already vul-
nerable state of being.
Enochian chess should be perfectly safe under normal con-
ditions and if used with respect and care. When you are not
working specifically on an inherent irregularity, do not become
attached to one particular element, choosing only that element
to play. Give yourself constant variety, playing all elements. The
Earth Board is the only element board that is suitable to play
on constantly. To do the same on the Air, Fire or Water Boards
would, in the long term, cause an imbalance.
There was one instance in my experience when a player pre-
ferred the Air Board and preferred to play either the Air or Fire
Angle. He was already overbalanced in favor of the Air element
in his make-up, as shown in his natal chart. It did not take him


```
And in the Beginning 283
```
long to become temporarily quite psychotic. This sort of thing
can be rectified by a game or two on the Earth Board (which in
this instance was the course taken), or keep the individual
away from Enochian chess and the Enochian Tablets altogether
for a while until normality returns. Even in mild cases, psycho-
logical help may be necessary. My suggestion is to use all of the
latter methods. First rebalance the individual with the appro-
priate element, then remove contact with the Enochian system
for a while, and if necessary seek help from a professional or
someone who knows what they are doing.
Do not forget that a fully colored Enochian chessboard is not
a mere chessboard. It is a board from which a very powerful
magical current of energy is produced, and this vital difference
can have a major effect on an individual's psyche. Even if there
were no magical emphasis whatsoever, and the individuals
were playing on the colored chessboards, the effect of the multi-
colored squares on a person's subconscious would still be con-
siderable. Coupled with the magical current coming through
the Tablets, one can generate a great deal of energy in a game.
Within the Inner Order of the Golden Dawn (the R.R. et
A.C.), the trained adept is exposed to these Tablets during
ritual. Thus he or she gradually gets used to harmonizing with
the forces that come through the Tablets so that, when an
Enochian chess game is played, the individual's aura is in
empathy with the relevant board being played.
You are probably wondering at this stage what effect play-
ing a chess game may have on an individual who has never
used the Tablets before in his or her life. The answer here is
twofold. Some people will feel no difference whatsoever, as their
senses will close down and they will play the game merely as a
chess game. Anything that takes place will take place on a sub-
tle subconscious level. Other people will find that they open up
to the energies of the chessboards and must therefore be very
careful to control that energy. I do not think I have ever found
the in-between category when playing Enochian chess. Over the
years, I have played a number of games with people who have
no connection with magic whatsoever, other than the love of the


284 Part ZV-Book of Fire

game, and they seem to fall only into the above two categories.
However, I have found it best to operate on the safe side and
only use the Earth Board for such people.
By now you will be aware of the different divinatory and
esoteric systems of symbolism applied to the chessboards. There
is another point of observation which must not be overlooked,
and that is numerology. First, there is the numerological com-
parison to the Chinese system of prophecy, the I Ching. In the I
Ching there are eight trigrams, comparable to the eight squares
across and down each board. If you multiply eight times eight,
you will get 64, which is the number of I Ching hexagrams
made up by the eight trigrams. Sixty-four is also the number of
squares on a chessboard.
Playing with numbers a bit further and using the Kabbalis-
tic system of association with numbers from the Tree of Life:
Eight is the number of Mercury and Hod. Note that 8 x 8 =
64, which is the number of Isis. Also, 64 = 6 + 4 = 10 (Malkuth),
and 1 + 0 = 1 (Kether). The number four seems to play a major
role. Four is also the number of Jupiter and Chesed. There are
four boards, four sets of chess pieces, four pawns per set, four
main playing pieces per set and four Kings to a board, each
governing an angle, making up four elemental angles per
board. You can see that 4 x 4 x 4 = 64 x 4 = 256, which makes
up the total pyramid squares in all the four element boards,
and each pyramid square has four pyramid faces. As for 256: 2
= dual creation (Chokmah) of 5 = feminine power (Geburah)
and 6 = Sun, masculine power (Tiphareth). Note that 2 + 5 + 6
= 13 = 1 + 3 = 4. Now 3 = Saturn and Binah, 4 = Man-con-
struction. Four also is the equal division of a circle. A circle is
360 degrees. If you divide it up equally into four, you get 90-
degree divisions: 90 = 9 + 0 = 9, and (360) 3 + 6 + 0 = 9, which
is the number of Yesod and the Moon. Four 90-degree right
angles construct a square (our boards). A square is four sided;
4 yields a numerical parity to perimeter and area when used as
the dimension of the sides of a square: perimeter = 4 + 4 + 4 +
4 = 16 and area = 4 x 4 = 16. And 16 is the number of Osiris
risen. Also, 6 + 1 = 7, the number of Venus, Netzach and Set,


```
And in the Beginning 285
```
and 16 = 1, which is the light of Kether shining through 6. In
one angle of a board there are 16 squares: four across and four
down. In the numbers 4 and 16 is the building block of human
predomination of thought and design.
The letters of Tetragrammaton (YHVH)~ are used as the for-
mula for the design of the chessboards. Out of these four letters
there are 24 different permutations;2 however, if one treats the
H and the as the same, there will then be only 12 permuta-
tions. Now the number 12 has always been a notable number
and highly esteemed by most nations of antiquity. The 12 per-
mutations were considered by the ancient Hebrew teachings to
be the 12 Banners of YHVH and were associated with the 12
Biblical tribes of Israel, which in turn were attributed to the 12
signs of the Zodiac.
Out of the 12 permutations, only four are used for the for-
mula of the Enochian Tablets because these four are the only
permutations that go sequentially forwards and backwards
without changing their pattern; i.e., between each masculine
letter (Y and V), there is a feminine letter (H or H'). In the other
permutations you will find combinations of feminine or mascu-
line letters together and undivided by its opposite. The Zodiac
signs attributed to these four permutations are the Cardinal
signs of the Zodiac, and the four permutations appear four
times, once on each of the element boards.

YHVH = Aries and the tribe of Gad, and is shown as the for-
mula for the Fire of Earth, Fire of Fire, Fire of Water and Fire
of Air Angles.
HVHY = Cancer and the tribe of Issachar, and is shown as
the formula for the Water of Water, Water of Air, Earth of Earth
and Earth of Fire Angles.

1. See the "Book of Berashith" in the Zohar for further information.
2. See The Kabbalah Unveiled by MacGregor Mathers.
3. The term H' describes the Hebrew letter "Heh final."


286 Part IV-Book of Fire

VHYH = Libra and the tribe of Asshur, and is shown as the
formula for the Air of Air, Air of Water; Air of Earth and Air of
Fire Angles.

HYHV = Capricorn and the tribe of Zebulun, and is shown
as the formula for the Earth of Air, Earth of Water, Water of
Earth and Water of Fire Angles.

If you treat the H and H' as different letters, you will end up
with eight permutations in which the letters run sequentially,
but you will still only have the four tribes associated, two com-
binations per tribe. The eight gives the eight different play set-
tings. Eight as a number is noted as the "first cube of energy"
and is considered an evenly even number representing "Univer-
sal Harmony." So one may assume at this point that each play
setting is a cube of energy, or the first impetus of a game.
By studying the chessboards, you will see that out of the 16
angles of the four element boards, 12 angles are associated with
the Zodiacal signs and the remaining four with the four ele-
ments. In addition, the element angle that is the same element
as the board is the greater angle of that board. When looking
back at the four permutations, you will see by reading them in
the correct directions4 that the greater angle of each board has
the permutation attributed to that same element. Here one can
see that Aries would rule the Fire Board, Cancer the Water
Board, Libra the Air Board and Capricorn the Earth Board,
irrespective of the Zodiac sign attributed to the actual angle.
These rulerships are merely token however, for each chess
square (Servient Square) has its own rulerships and external
influences which act thereon. To understand the Servient
Squares in more depth, look back to the layout of the Enochian
Tablets and the Calvary Crosses in each quarter of each Tablet.
An influencing force on a Servient Square is observed through
the relationship that the square has with the Calvary Cross of
its quarter by column and rank.

4. See fig. 9, p. 28.


```
And in the Beginning
```
```
J = Jupiter
Ma = Mars
Mo = Moon
S = Sun
M = Mercury
V = Venus
```
```
F = Fire
W = Water
A = Air
E = Earth
```
```
FIGURE 50-INFLUENCING FORCES FROM CALVARY CROSS
```
The four planets involved are Mars, Moon, Mercury and
Venus, and these planets represent specific principles of energy
exchange between the individual squares and the elements from
the column of the Calvary Cross. Since there are four elements,
each planet has four possible vibrations that it can produce, but
only one vibration per Servient Square under its dominion. Each
planet will reveal a type of outgoing energy together with an
urge toward expression of a certain kind, but it also reveals a
specific need for activity and fulfillment which is fed along a par-
ticular vibratory ~avelen~th.~ The vibratory wavelength is used
as a catalyst to the vibration of the Servient Square's Zodiacal
sign and other attributions. From this the function of a Servient
Square becomes more evident. Take for example figure 50 above.

5. I assume that you are now familiar with the vibratory influences of the
planets and elements.


```
288 Part W-Book of Fire
```
In this diagram we will focus on the bottom left-hand corner
pyramid square. As you see by the arrows, this Servient Square
is influenced by Mars and the element of Earth (Geburah and
Earth element in Malkuth). If we were looking at the third
square on the second rank, the influence would be Mercury and
the Air element (Hod and Air element in Malkuth). The Sun in
the center of the Cross has its influence through the Zodiac signs
as attributed to the Servient Squares. Jupiter is an outer planet
and not included as a force directly through the Servient
Squares. It works indirectly through the Kerubic Squares. When
analyzing a divination game, therefore, you should also take into
account the Calvary Cross influence on the chessboards.
As a structure, the pyramid system of the Tablets is much
like Eastern mandalas, though infinitely more complex. Being
based on the quarternary (four elements), the pyramid forma-
tion and structure gives birth to the quinary by the truncated
top (Spirit). This can relate in terms of Eastern philosophy to
the five stages of human consciousness. An individual pyramid
can relate to a part of the Universe in microcosm. With this in
view, it is advised that you do not work with the "part" but first
construct the "whole"; that is, the full set of Enochian Tablets
should be constructed. Through the virtue of your effort in con-
structing them, you will be integrating yourself into the system
through a systematic process of the nucleus of self.
The Enochian chessboards, though only part of the Tablets,
can be used magically similarly to the Tablets. However, when
working with the Enochian system, I would suggest only the fol-
lowing practices be used in conjunction with the chessboards.
Any other method, for example pyramid workings, etc., should
be worked with the Tablets.

1. Invocation-God-form assumption or deity association
with the chess pieces. Invocation of the Angle of the Ptah, as
this piece takes place of the "I," the innermost part of yourself.
2. Evocation of the god-forms and of the energy within the
pyramid square that they preside over. Evocation of an external
entity to help strengthen your perception during game play.


```
And in the Beginning 289
```
Before an adept can activate any of these methods, she6
must first integrate in her psyche a binding of all the associa-
tions of the Enochian system--or, at least, of the particular ele-
ment Tablet, its hierarchies and associations, which she will be
working with. This is very important, for when using the chess
boards magically, you will not be working just with the boards.
You will be drawing from the whole Enochian system through
the Tablets, even though the actual Tablets may not be visibly
there. Pat Zalewski's Golden Dawn Enochian Magic should be
of help here, together with books previously recommended.

6. For convenience, I use the feminine pronouns.


```
UPPER FACE
```
```
WWEK LNEL OF
LOWER FACE
```
FIGURE DIVISION OF FACES ON THE TREE OF LIFE


Four

Ego Types

I

f you take the Kabbalistic Tree of Life as a working glyph, you
will see that the elemental divisions of the Enochian chess-
boards and chess pieces and pawns parallel the divisions of
the four Worlds of the Tree of Life, and the subdivisions
therein. This is done through the association of Fire with the
World of Atziluth, Water with the World of Briah, Air with the
World of Yetzirah and Earth with the World of ~ssiah.' Because
we are dealing with the four elements, however, which are basi-
cally of the "world of matter," our main frame of reference in the
following will be with the World of Assiah and its subdivisions.
First of all, break the "Tree" up into an upper face and a
lower face. Then break the lower face into four upper triads that
pivot on Tiphareth and four lower triads that pivot on Yesod, as
shown in the diagram on the opposite page.

1. See Part I11 of this book.


292 Parf IV-Book of Fire

The "triads" that I refer to are the triangular spaces between
the Sephiroth as divided by the Paths (fig. 52). Looking first at
the lower triads of the lower face: these all pivot on Yesod, which
in this instance represents the ego, the everyday working psy-
che. The triads generating off Yesod, which represents the ego
and its needs, are divided into the extroverted and introverted
nature. Dealing first with the extrovert triads, the first triad is
the Intellectual Triangle, which has a sanguine humor2 and is
made up from Malkuth, Yesod and Hod. This is the intellect that
accumulates facts, communicates and patterns everything into
what is logical and acceptable to the conscious mind, the thinker,
planner, the detailer and examiner. Through Malkuth, it is influ-
enced by material and external, mundane concerns. Through
Hod, it is influenced to gather information and to be able to
apply the intellect to a purpose. These are put to form by the
subconscious perceptions formed by the ego through Yesod. This
triad is associated with the Air element, to which I have associ-
ated the Bishop's Pawn (Air Pawn).
The second outward-looking triad is the Physical Triangle,
which is made up from Malkuth, Yesod and Netzach. This triad
is the function of the psycho-physical make-up. The power of
Netzach gives an overlay of body type and physicaVsexua1
desires and psychological influence on the physical. Things are
seen in the form of activity through the perception of Yesod, and
ego is expressed through what one can physically achieve. The
theory formed by the intellectual triad is utilized in the physi-
cal triad. This is the triad of the five senses as given by
Malkuth. The Earth element is associated here, together with
the Rook's Pawn (Earth Pawn).
The two introverted triads are both connected to Tiphareth
and are concerned with honesty, beauty and clarity, in an inter-
relationship of Yesod and Tiphareth.

- -
2. The term "humor" is a medical term used by herbalists and medical practi-
tioners of the early 19th century and earlier. It represented a physical and
psychological type.


FIGURE 52-THE TRIAD TYPES AND CHESS
PIECES AND PAWNS APPLIED TO THE TREE OF LIFE


```
294 Part IV-Book of Fire
```
First, the Instinctual Triangle is made up from Yesod,
Tiphareth and Netzach. The type evolved here is influenced
by Tiphareth through natural balance, with the perception
and imagination of Yesod, and the strength, drive and cre-
ativity of Netzach. This triad gives the ability to react to any
deviation by putting it into balance. It initiates action and is
a complement to the intellectual triad. Its instinctive behav-
ior and initiative is what comes naturally during times when
one does not have time to think about a response. This triad
is associated with the element of Fire and the Knight's Pawn
(Fire Pawn).
The final triad is the Sensory Triangle, which is made up
from Yesod, Hod and Tiphareth. Hod's influence causes a gath-
ering of information, but in this case it is on an inner intu-
itional level of data that is not tangible. Tiphareth enables it to
relate this data clearly and with truth through Hod and Yesod.
This triad is the one that picks up impressions and informa-
tion, which would normally not have been absorbed through
the intellect or physical body, and sifts them into clear impres-
sions at terrific speeds. It acts like a radar and works in the
realm of the sensors and psychic impressions. The Water ele-
ment is associated here, together with the Queen's Pawn
(Water Pawn).
Now let us briefly list the upper triads of the lower face
which all pivot on Tiphareth, the pure expression of the Self.
These are an evolved reflection of the lower triads and work in
the realm of individual consciousness rather than personal con-
sciousness as the lower triads do.
The first is the Intelligence Triangle, made up of Hod, Gebu-
rah and Tiphareth and associated with the Air element and the
Bishop among the Enochian chess pieces. If you break up the
word "intelligence," you will see that "in" is "from within"; "tell"
is to "give information, to relate or reveal"; and "gen" is "to be
born or to become." When you examine the Hebrew letters of
the Paths that make up the triad, you will see combinations


```
Four Ego Types 295
```
that also tell a story. For example ~ernl~~inl~amed,~ which
means to divide into parts, and MernlLamed is to cut off. This
phrase meant the circumcision that was inflicted on Adam (and
supposedly to be done to all men) after the Fall. The
LamedAyin combination refers to licking up or swallowing
down, with the Mem representing "from." So here, when study-
ing the Kabbalah, the Tree and its influences through the
Paths, the Sephiroth as shown in the lower triads and the
meanings of the words given to each, one can begin to under-
stand the inner meanings of the Enochian chess pieces.
Through the utterances of the "Words," the powers can be
revealed. You can see from this that the above would allude to
the "Fall" or transition from one level of awareness to another:
something is born from an intelligence and in doing so brings
forth knowledge. Birth is usually severe but beautiful, hence
the combination of Geburah and Tiphareth.
The second triad is the Responsive Triangle: Tiphareth,
Chokmah and Chesed, associated with the Fire element and
the Enochian chess Knight. The word "responsive" may be bro-
ken down thus: "res" gives "a thing or a point, a matter that is
a cause or action"; "pons" comes from Latin, "a bridge"; and
"response" is to answer or react to a stimulus. The combina-
tion of Hebrew letters from the connecting Paths is
YodlHehNau, which is "to be" and is a natural generative
force. Yod is the Logos and Heh the Primal Light, Vau is the
united result of the two, therefore the response, or should I
say the result of the reaction of the two. Looking at this
another way, it gives a positive exclamation and encourages,
grieves or threatens. Here we see the connecting link between
above and below that must respond to stimulus and generate
or transmit.

3. These consonants are written here to be read from left to right, but if they
were written in Hebrew, the letters would be reversed and read from right to
left. Therefore, for example, Mem Ayin Lamed would be written in Hebrew as
Lamed Ayin Mem (+~?3), Mem being the first letter of the combination.


296 Part IV-Book of Fire

The third triad is the Substantial Triangle: Netzach,
Tiphareth and Chesed, associated with the Earth element and
the Rook. In the word "substantial," "sub" is beneath or a stance
or position. This seems quite appropriate, because the Rook is
the Heh final of the Yod/Heh/Vau, and as shown in figure 52, it is
placed below the Knight. This also fits in quite adequately from
a Kabbalistic interpretation.4 "Stance" is from the Latin sub-
stantia and means an essence, or from the Latin substantare,
which is to be present or to exist, and "substant," which is "con-
tinuing substance." The Rook is an "earthy part of" piece and
represents the substance of the element it is in. The combination
of Hebrew letters derived from the Paths of this triangle is
Nun/Yod/Kaph: this refers to a union or foundationlthrone.
The fourth triad is the Intuitional Triangle: Tiphareth,
Geburah and Binah, associated with the Water element and the
Queen. The word "intuitional" may be broken down as: "in" =
from inside, within; "intuit," which is to look on or consider;
"tion," from; hence "intuition" means to regard or look at from.
The Hebrew letter combination herein is Lamed/Cheth/Zain,
which is to withdraw inside, but ZaidCheth is to pluck-
remember the apple in the Garden of Eden. ZaidLamed is to
"let go," and ChethILamed is to make a hole or opening. This
area receives the information from the Responsive Triangle,
gestates it and gives birth to the Intelligence Triangle.
Finally we have the King of the chess set, which has been
associated with the quaternary of the upper face, the Collective
Unconsciousness. It is the power of the elements and is second
only to the Ptah, the essence. The quaternary (four elements)
gives birth to the quinary (Spirit). Power broken up gives "pow,"
which stands for the poll, the head or chief, and "er" = more of.
Power comes from the Latin posse, which is "to be able."
If you look at the combination of Paths surrounding this
area, you will find the Hebrew letters Beth, Aleph, Zain and

4. A detailed examination of the Kabbalah is beyond the scope of this book.
The reader is referred to the Zohar (vols. I-V), The Kabbalah Unveiled by S.L.
MacGregor Mathers, The Holy Kabbalah by A.E. Waite and Kabbalah by
Charles Ponce.


```
Four Ego Types 297
```
Heh, with the Paths crossing over the area horizontally and
vertically being Daleth and Gimel, respectively. Combinations
of these give: BetWDaleth = single, alone; BetWGimel = meat,
or food which is broken off or apart; Gimelmeth = supporting
back or altar; ZainBeth = a gulf, spring or issuing out; Daletld
AlephBeth = gold (philosophers stone); Gimel/Aleph/Heh = to
increase or swell, grow higher; BetWAleph = to descend and
AlephBeth = to come or go; HehBetWAleph = to be willing;
Beth/Heh/Aleph = to love; ZainMeph = time or at that time;
and Hemeth = empty space, a hollow.
A description of the above combinations could give: "And so
from a single source the bread is broken apart so that it may
pour forth from the altar (tabernacle) like a spring as gold so
that all may increase and swell with the light through love, and
at that time all may be willing to ascend just as the light
descends through space and time."
Each of these major chess pieces when moved on a chess-
board represents a shift in consciousness, or rather in the
unconscious. The point here is that the chessboard in reflection
and the pieces on it represent the world above as well as below.
Therefore, by careful manipulation of the chess pieces, you can
tap into the astral currents of the world above and thereby
increase your own awareness and perception of what is hap-
pening in the present with respect to the natural laws that gov-
ern us. The chess pieces such as the King are merely reflections
of these energies, but they are represented in archetypal forms.
By manipulating these pieces, we tend to use this conception of
energy when dealing with everyday life. So, when we reach out
during meditation to the image one of these pieces represents,
we can in fact draw from this energy through the archetype and
manipulate it to our desired end.
The soul of mankind according to the Zohar was formed in
the Garden of Eden by the four winds, and the activity within the
Garden is said to coincide with the created physical form of the
four elements. Here both upper and lower worlds unify in a sin-
gle instance to create life itself. This concept is analogous to the
statement given in the Emerald Tablet of Hermes Trismegistos:


298 Part N-Book of Fire

```
In truth certainly and without doubt, whatever is below is like
that which is above, and whatever is above is like that which
is below, to accomplish the miracles of one thing.... it rises
from Earth to Heaven and comes down again from Heaven to
Earth, and thus acquires the power of the realities above and
the realities below. In this way you will acquire the glory of
the whole world, and all the darkness will leave you.
```
It will be seen now that many combinations are possible of
the above triads, but the main purpose is to ascend the lower
triads to the upper triads, to Tiphareth, then to continue to
ascend. Using the World of Assiah as a glyph and the Four
Worlds within, take each element set of chess pieces and pawns
and apply them each to each of these Worlds; i.e., Earth set to
Assiah of Assiah, Air set to Yetzirah of Assiah, Water set to
Briah of Assiah and Fire set to Atziluth of Assiah. It is here you
will see the many combinations of character types given by the
chess pieces. Note in figure 53 how the Worlds overlap, causing
the Yesod of one World to overlap Daath of the World below.


Enocl
pieces

```
nian chess set
s applied:
```
```
Fire Set
```
```
Water Set
```
```
Air Set
```
```
Earth Set
```


Ritual Magic

and the

Chess Game

0

ne of the most interesting and important documents in the
Golden Dawn's Inner Order are the 22 papers. Apart from
the introduction, the 22 is broken down into five parts under
the Name of Yeheshuah (YHShVH, ;11W7'), with each see-
tion prefixed by a Hebrew letter. As the Order papers state:

```
For to the Letter Yod ' and the element of Fire belong the
works of Ceremonial Magic, as the evocations of the Spirits of
the Elements...
Unto the First Heh 7 the consecration and charging of
Telesmata, and the production of Natural Phenomena, as
storms, earthquakes...
Unto the Great Holy Letter Shin W are allotted Three
classes of works: spiritual development, transformations and
invisibility.
Unto the Letter Vau 1 Divination in all its branches; and
the art of making the Link between the subject of the work
```

302 Part IV-Book of Fire

```
and the process of divination.
And to the Final Heh 7 the works and operations of the
Art of Alchemy, the order of its processes and Transmutation.
```
One can see that, by any standard, this formula is consider-
able and very technical. The basis for it is the 0=0 or initiation
ceremony of the Golden Dawn, which, in the 22, has its compo-
nent parts broken down into 24 steps. This ceremony was
adapted to the above formula for basically all matters of magic,
in one form or another.

```
Index for General Reference to
the Enterer Ceremony of the 0=0 Grade
```
A -The Ceremony itself. The place of the Temple.
B -The Hierophant.
C -The Off~cers.
D -The Candidate.
E -The Ceremony of Opening.
F -Hierophant states that he has received a Dispensation from
Second Order, and commands Hegemon to prepare Candi-
date. Candidate prepared. Speech of Hegemon.
G-Admission of Candidate. First barring by Kerux. First bap-
tism of the Candidate with Water and Fire.
H-The Candidate is conducted to the foot of the Altar. Hiero-
phant asks "Wherefore hast thou come, etc." Candidate
replies "I seek the hidden Light, etc."
I -Candidate is asked whether he is willing to take the Oblig-
ation. He assents; and is instructed now to kneel at the
Altar.
J -Administration of the Obligation, and raising the Neophyte
from the kneeling position.
K-Candidate is placed in the North. Oration of the Hiero-
phant, "The Voice of my Higher Self, etc." Hierophant com-
mands the mystic circumambulation in the Path of
Darkness.
L -Procession. Candidate barred in South. Second Baptism of


```
Ritual Magic and the Chess Game^303
```
Water and Fire. Speech of Hegemon. Allowing the Candi-
date to proceed.
M-Hoodwink slipped up. Challenge of Hiereus. Speech of
Hegemon. Speech of Hiereus. Candidate re-veiled and
passed on.
N-Circumambulation. Barred in North. Third Baptism. Speech
of Hegemon allowing Candidate to approach unto the Gate
of the East.
0 -Hoodwink slipped up for the second time, Hierophant chal-
lenges. Hegemon answers for the Candidate. Speech of
Hierophant. Candidate passes on.
P -Candidate led to West of Altar. Hierophant advances by the
Path of Samekh. Officers form the Triangle. Prayer of
Hierophant.
Q -Candidate rises. Hierophant addresses him, "Long hast
thou dwelt in darkness. Quit the Night and seek the Day."
Hoodwink finally removed, Scepters and Swords joined.
"We receive thee, etc." Then the Mystic Words.
R -Hierophant indicates Lamp of Kerux. He commands that
the Candidate be conducted to the East of the Altar. He
orders Hiereus to bestow signs, etc. Hiereus places Candi-
date between Pillars. Signs and words. He orders the
fourth and final consecration to take place.
S -Hegemon removes rope and invests Candidate with his
Insignia. Hiereus then ordains the Mystic Circumambula-
tion in the Path of Light.
T -Hierophant lectures on the Symbols. Proclamation by
Kerux.
U-Hierophant commands Hiereus to address Candidate.
V -Hierophant addresses Neophyte on subject of study.
W-Blood produced. Speech of Kerux. Hiereus' final caution.
X -The closing takes place.

The main section 'which concerns us at present is the Div-
ination section. In spite of what is said about this part of the 22
papers, about being "Divination in all its branches," as it stands
it is in reality designed for the Tarot. When we first tried to


304 Part IV-Book of Fire

apply it to the chess game it fell down badly. It could not be con-
sidered for the chess game unless some parts of it were rewrit-
ten. This was done, but it was written so that it still adhered to
the general index of the 0=0 as given previously.
You may ask whether the use of ritual formula applied to
the chess game is really necessary. Even if one could not sum-
mon any magical power, the psychological preparation of the
game with this formula would be enough of a benefit to align
one's mental processes for the divination game. By this, I mean
that these various states or levels of consciousness which one
enters during the ritual (closely allied with Zen states of satori)
prepare your psyche for a better understanding of what it will
assimilate during the game.
The following formula is modified for Enochian chess, yet
still adheres to its original concept in the 22.

```
22 Formula of Chess Divination
Under the Letter Vau
```
A -The Form of Divination.
B -The Diviner.
C -The Forces acting in the Divination.
D -The subject of the Divination.
E-The preparation of all things necessary, and the right
understanding of the process, so as to formulate a connect-
ing link between the process employed and the Macrocosm.
F -The Invocation of the Higher, arrangement of the scheme of
divination and initiation of the forces thereof.
G-The choosing of the Elemental Board. First assertion of lim-
its and correspondences.
H-The actual and careful formulation of the question; and
consideration of all its correspondences and classifications
when choosing the square for the Ptah piece.
I -Announcement aloud that all the correspondences taken
are correct and perfect; the Diviner places his hand upon
the Ptah piece. Sitting East, he prepares to invoke the
forces required in the Divination.


```
Ritual Magic and the Chess Game^305
```
J -Solemn invocation of the necessary spiritual forces to aid
the Diviner in the Divination. Then let him say, "Arise
before me clear as a mirror, 0 magical vision requisite for
the accomplishment of this divination."
K-Accurately define the term of the question; putting down
clearly in writing what is already known, what is suspected
or implied, and what is sought to be known. And see that
thou verify in the beginning of the judgment that part
which is already known.
L -Recording of play moves and taking note of correspon-
dences and their interrelationships.
M-The completion of the first round of play.
N-Same as section L.
0 -The second round of game and up to, but not including, the
first move of the King.
P -The first move of the Diviner's King towards the Ptah piece.
Q -The Diviner now completely and thoroughly formulates his
whole judgment as well for the immediate future as for the
development thereof, taking into account the knowledge
and indications given him by the angelic form (if he is in
direct astral contact with the force governing the divination
play).
R -The King reaching the Ptah Square and remaining there
for one round of the game gives a positive result. If the
King does not reach the Ptah Square but the game
nonetheless ends through King capture etc., there is a neg-
ative result to the question.
S -Final round of game play.
T -The Diviner then compares carefully the whole judgment
and decisions arrived at with their conclusions, and deliv-
ers now plainly a succinct and consecutive judgment
thereon.
U-The Diviner gives advice to the Consultant as to what use
he shall make of the judgment.
V -The Diviner formulates clearly with what forces it may be
necessary to work in order to combat the Evil, or fix the
Good, promised by the Divination.


```
306 Part IV-Book of Fire
```
```
W-Lastly, remember that unto thee a divination shall be as a
sacred work of the Divine Magic of Light, and not to be
performed to pander unto thy curiosity regarding the
secrets of another, and if by this means thou shalt arrive at
a knowledge of another's secrets, thou shalt respect and
not betray them.
```
Experimental Methodology

This section has been included for those who wish to go further
into the magical arena with the chess game. It is based on a
number of experiments we have been conducting. Although my
studies are far from complete, I felt that comment on them
should be made to give those who wish to experiment in this
area information on some of our developments on the subject.
The first experimental area to be discussed is god-form
assumption. While this is not a new concept with the Golden
Dawn in itself, its adaptation to the chess game is. This exper-
iment is usually conducted after the completion of a divination
game, after it has been analyzed. For example, if the game has
turned out to be negative, from the analysis certain key points
of influence are noted that if handled differently may have
turned the tide of the game to a positive victory. I have tended
to term these key aspects "pivot points," for they are points of
balance that can alter the game. -
Taking a lead from Chinese sages who, when experimenting
with the I Ching for divination, found that if they had a nega-
tive hexagram for an inquiry, they could then work their way
back to the point or line where the negative influence began.
This was done through a careful study of how the Chinese ele-
ments would interact with each other. At that point they would
find out what would go wrong and look at a probable alternative
action that the inquirer could take to avoid the negative result.
They assumed that if, through foreknowledge of a probable des-
tiny, they made a correct move at the right time, then the whole
concept or outcome of the divination could be altered.


```
Ritual Magic and the Chess Game 307
```
If this method works with the I Ching, it most certainly
would work with Enochian chess divination, because the
same fundamental principles apply. I have used this method
quite often with the Tarot. If a probable direction looks nega-
tive, I divine further probable directions in accordance with
particular alternative reactions or actions until I find a more
suitable result. In this way one can have more control over
one's life.
There is an important limitation to the chess game that
must be considered when using this method. It can only apply
to personal events, not to cases where entire countries are
involved. To change the direction of countries would be beyond
the ability of most adepts, but the method will work when
applied to a personal situation over which you do have control.
This effort involves two areas of involvement. The first is to
be ready to make the correct changes when the time in the situ-
ation occurs that parallels the pivot point. The next, and this
must be done first, is to try to astrally alter the influence. Even
the Chinese sages who did this with the I Ching insisted that a
small ritual be performed to appease the ancient gods and tell
them what one was about to do before one actually did it. This
is done by assuming the astral form of the chess piece, which is
placed over the correct chess square, and directing its energies
through the power of the square.
There are two ritual methods to accomplish this. The first is
by the 22 formula of Transformation under the presidency of
the letter Shin. The second is a shortened formula: The temple
is set up in the 0=0 grade of Neophyte with the chess game up
to the pivot point placed on the altar. The object of this exercise
is to be able to neutralize the influence of the opposing astral
currents, shown as the opposing chess pieces, by visually form-
ing the god-form of the piece in question to direct the energy of
the square to a desired end.
As mentioned earlier, this is still very much in the experi-
mental stage and a great deal more experimentation needs to
be done to confirm its effectiveness. However, at this point, the
results look promising.


308 Part IV-Book of Fire

```
22 Formula of Transformation Under the Letter Shin
```
A The Astral Form.
B -The Magician.
C -The Forces used to alter the Form.
D -The Form to be taken.
E -The Equation of the Symbolism in the Sphere of Sensation.
F -Invocation of the Higher. The definition of the Form
required as a delineation of blind forces, and the awakening
of the same by its proper formulation.
G-Formulating clearly to the mind the Form intended to be
taken. The Restriction and Definition of this as a clear form
and the actual baptism by Water and by Fire with the
Order Name of the adept.
HThe Actual Invocation aloud of the form desired to be
assumed to formulate before you, the statement of the
Desire of the Operator and the reason thereof.
I -Announcement aloud that all is now ready for the operation
of the Transformation of the Astral Body. The Magician
mentally places the form as nearly as circumstances permit
in the position of the Enterer, himself taking the place of
the Hierophant, holding his Wand by the black portion
ready to commence the Oration aloud.
J -Let him now repeat a powedul exorcism of the shape into
which he desires to transform himself, using the Names, etc.,
belonging to the Plane, Planet, or other Eidolon, most in har-
mony with the shape desired. Then holding the Wand by the
black End, and directing the flower over the head of the form,
let him say, "In the name of the Lord of the Universe, Arise
before me, 0 Form of , into which I have elected to
transform myself. So that seeing me men may see the thing
that they see not, and comprehend not the thing they behold."
K-The Magician saith, "Pass toward the North shrouded in
darkness, 0 Form of , into which I have elected
to transform myself." Then let him repeat the usual Ora-
tion from the Throne of the East. Then command the Mys-
tic circumambulation.


```
Ritual Magic and the Chess Game 309
```
L -Now bring the Form around to the South, arrest it, and for-
mulate it there, standing between two great Pillars of Fire
and Cloud. Purify it with Water and by Fire, by placing
these elements on either side of the Form.
M-Passes to West, face Southeast, formulate the Form before
thee, this time endeavoring to render it physically visible.
Repeat speeches of Hiereus and Hegemon.
N-Same as L.
0 -Same as M.
P -Pass to the East of Altar, formulating the Form as near in
the position of the Neophyte as may be. Now address a
solemn invocation and conjuration by Divine Names, etc.,
appropriate to render the form fitting for thy Transforma-
tion therein.
Q-Remain East of Altar, address the Form "Child of Earth,
etc.," endeavoring now to see it physically. Then at the
words, "We receive Thee, etc." he draws the Form towards
him so as to envelop him, being careful at the same time to
invoke the Divine Light by the rehearsal of the Mystic
Words.
R-Still keeping himself in the form of the Magician say,
"Before all Magical Manifestation cometh the knowledge of
the Divine Light." He then moves to the Pillars and gives
Signs, etc., endeavoring with the whole force of his Will to
feel himself actually and physically in the shape of the
Form desired. And at this point he must see as if in a
cloudy and misty manner the outline of the Form enshroud-
ing him, though not yet completely and wholly visible.
When this occurs, but not before, let him formulate himself
as standing between the two vast Pillars of Fire and Cloud.
S -He now again endeavors to formulate the Form as if visibly
enshrouding him; and still, astrally, retaining the Form, he
thrice circumambulates the place of working.
T --Standing at the East, let him thoroughly formulate the shape,
which should now appear manifest, and as if enshrouding
him, even to his own vision; and then let him proclaim aloud,
"Thus have I formulated unto myself this Transformation."


310 Part IV-Book of Fire

U-Let him now invoke all the Superior Names, etc., of the
Plane appropriate to the Form that he may retain it under
his proper control and guidance.
V-He states clearly to the Form what he intends to do with it.
W-Having obtained the desired effect, and gone about in the
desired form; it is required that thou shouldst conjure the
Powers of the Light to act against that shroud of Dark-
ness and Mystery so as to disintegrate it, lest any force
seek to use it as a medium for an obsession, etc. There-
fore rehearse a conjuration as aforesaid, and then open
the shroud and come forth out of the midst thereof, and
then disintegrate that shroud (Form), by the use of a con-
juration to the forces of the plane appropriate to the
Form, to disintegrate and scatter the particles thereof,
but affirming that they shall again be readily attracted at
thy command.
But on no account must that shroud of awful Mystery
be left without such disintegration, seeing that it would
speedily attract an occupant which would become a terrible
vampire praying upon him who had called it into being.
And after frequent rehearsals of this operation, the
thing may almost be done "per Motem."

The second method of experimentation is that of evocation
with the chess set. At Thoth-Hermes, we have experimented
with the Knight's move as a sigil and with numerous other
methods of evocation with the chess set, but the best method we
have found to date is to use the 22 formula of evocation. This is
accomplished by placing the chessboard in the triangle you use
for evocation with a single piece on it, the one you wish to evoke.
It is placed on the board and square that you require it to
manipulate.
To use this method, the adept must be very familiar with the
chess squares and their individual functions. The only way this
can be accomplished is for him or her to have scryed or astrally
projected into each of the squares to record their effects. This
takes years when done correctly and is only for the very experi-
enced adept. At Thoth-Hermes, adepts must have personally


```
Ritual Magic and the Chess Game 311
```
scryed into all the squares of the Enochian Tablets before they
can advance on to stages such as this.
The use of the chessboards and pieces for evocation differs
considerably from performing a normal evocation per se
(which in itself takes some effort). Here the object is to get the
god-form to manipulate the Enochian Servient Square angels
to help him perform the desired task. In view of this, you can
see that the evocation is in itself multilayered. An example of
how this works is to place the Knight Horus, on the Earth
BoardIEarth Angle, and on the square of the Earth Element,
the densest one in all of the tablets. Horus is to be told to
exert his power on the angel of the square so that a sticking
point or a delaying point in an event can be hurried along.
Horus being the Yod Force will instigate the thrust in the
direction required.
There are a number of less complex ways to handle this, but
the use of the chess piece on the chessboard modifies the cur-
rent of or us' and that of the chessboard. It then fuses them
together into a situation where a type of magical chain reaction
occurs. In my opinion, this is a very powerful force to set in
motion. The evocation does not specifically relate to any chess
game or pivot point but is the use of the magic squares of the
chessboard, and the force they represent, guided by a powerful
current or god-form.
It must be repeated that these methods are still experimen-
tal and a great deal of work needs to be done in this direction. If
Enochian chess is played on a regular basis, a link will be estab-
lished to the individual pieces and each will become a core of
power that the adept can tap if needed. Using an eEgy such as
a chess piece as a power base is as old as antiquity and the roots
go back to pre-Egyptian times, with strong links that form the
basis of cults that still exist today.

1. See 2-5, Secret Teachings of the Golden Dawn: Book I, The Neophyte Ritual
0=0 by Pat Zalewski for a full description of the current of Horus and other
Earth pieces.


312 Part IV-Book of Fire

```
22 Formula of Evocation Under the Letter yod2
```
A -The Magic Circle.
B -The Magician, wearing the Great Lamen of the Hierophant;
and his scarlet Robe. A ~entacle,~ whereon is engraved the
sigi14 of the Spirit to be invoked, has painted on the back of
it the circle and cross as shown on the Hierophant's Lamen.
C -The Names and Formulae to be employed.
D -The Symbol of the whole evocation.
E -The Construction of the circle and the placing of all the
symbols, etc., employed, in the places properly allotted to
them; so as to represent the interior of a G.D. Temple in the
Enterer, and the purification and consecration of the actual
piece of ground or place, selected for the performance of the
Evocation.
F -The Invocation of the Higher Powers. Pentacle formed of
three concentric bands, name and Sigil therein, in proper
colors, is to be bound thrice with a cord, and shrouded in
black, thus bringing into action a Blind Force to be further
directed or differentiated in the Process of the Ceremony.
Announcement aloud of the Object of the working; naming
the Spirit or Spirits, which it is desired to evoke. This is
pronounced standing in the center of the Circle and turning
towards the quarter from which the Spirit will come.
G-The Name and Sigil of the Spirit, wrapped in a black cloth,
or covering, is now placed within the circle, at the point cor-

2. This formula as given in the Golden Dawn is flexible and can be manipu-
lated as I have done with the Divination section of the 22, providing that the
original concepts are kept in mind. The formula was never intended to be a
hard and fast rule never to be altered; common sense must apply throughout.
3. When applied to a chess game, the Pentacle is usually a seal of the
board~Tablet (usually placed above it). These seals can be found in Regardie's
Golden Dawn.
4. This sigil can literally be a sigil of the name of the Egyptian god-form plus
that of the Enochian angel of the square. These sigils can be derived with the
Rose Cross method as described in Regardie's Golden Dawn.


```
Ritual Magic and the Chess Game^313
```
responding to the West, representing the Candidate. The
consecration of Baptism by water and fire of the Sigil then
takes place, and the proclamation in a loud and firm voice
of the spirit (or spirits) to be evoked.
H-The veiled Sigil is now to be placed at the foot of the Altar.
The Magician then calls aloud the Name of the Spirit, surn-
moning him to appear, stating for what purpose the spirit is
evoked: what is desired in the operation; why the evocation
is performed at this time, and finally solemnly affirming
that the Spirit shall be evoked by the Ceremony.
I -Announcement aloud that all is prepared for the com-
mencement of the actual Evocation. If it be a good spirit the
Sigil is now to be placed within the White Triangle on the
Altar, the Magician places his left hand upon it, raises in
his right hand the magical Implement employed (usually
the Sword) erect; and commences the Evocation of the
Spirit N., to visible appearance. The Magician stands in the
Place of the Hierophant during the Obligation, irrespective
of the particular quarter of the Spirit. But, if the nature of
that Spirit be evil, then the Sigil must be placed without
and to the West of the White Triangle and the Magician
shall be careful to keep the point of the Magical Sword
upon the center of the Sigil.
J -Now let the Magician imagine himself as clothed outwardly
with the semblance of the form of the Spirit to be evoked,
and in this let him be careful not to identify himself with
the spirit, which would be dangerous; but only to formulate
a species of mask, worn for the time being. And if he knows
not the symbolic form of the Spirit, then let him assume the
form of an Angel belonging unto the same class of opera-
tion, this form being assumed. Then let him pronounce
aloud, with a firm and solemn voice, a convenient and
potent oration and exorcism of the Spirit unto visible
appearance.
At the conclusion of this exorcism, taking the covered
Sigil in his left hand, let him smite it thrice with the flat
blade of the Magic Sword. Then let him raise on high his


```
314 Part N-Book of Fire
```
arms to their utmost stretch, holding in his left hand the
veiled Sigil, and in his right the Sword of Art erect. At the
same time stamping thrice upon the ground with his right
foot.
K-The veiled and corded Sigil is then to be placed in the
Northern part of the Hall at the edge of the Circle, and the
Magician employs the oration of the Hierophant, from the
throne of the East, modifying it slightly, as follows: "The
voice of the Exorcism said unto me, Let me shroud myself
in darkness, peradventure thus may I manifest myself in
Light, etc." The Magician then proclaims aloud that the
Mystic Circumambulation will take place.
L -The Magician takes up the Sigil in his left hand and cir-
cumambulates the Magic Circle once, then passes to the
South and halts. He stands (having placed the Sigil on the
ground) between it and the West, and repeats the oration of
the Kerux. And again consecrates it with Water and Fire.
Then takes it in his hand, facing westward saying, "Crea-
ture of , twice consecrate, thou mayest approach
the gate of the West."
M-The Magician now moves to the West of the Magical Circle,
holds the Sigil in his left hand and the sword in his right,
faces Southwest, and again astrally masks himself with the
form of the Spirit, and for the first time partially opens the
covering of the Sigil, without however entirely removing it.
He then smites it once with the flat blade of the sword, say-
ing, in a loud, clear, and firm voice: "Thou canst not pass
from concealment unto Manifestation, save by the virtue of
the Name Elohim. Before all things are the Chaos and
Darkness, and the Gates of the Land of Night. I am He
Whose Name is Darkness. I am the Great One of the Path
of the Shades. I am the Exorcist in the midst of the Exor-
cism. Appear thou therefore without fear before me, so pass
thou on." He then reveils the Sigil.
N-Take the Sigil to the North, circumambulate first, halt,
place Sigil on the ground, stand between it and the East,
repeat the oration of the Kerux, again consecrate with Fire


```
Ritual Magic and the Chess Game^315
```
and Water. Then take it up, face North, and say "Creature
of , thrice consecrate, thou mayest approach the
Gate of the East."
0-Repeat Section M in Northeast. Magician then passes to
East, takes up Sigil in left and Sword in right hand.
Assumes the Mask of the Spirit form, smites the Sigil with
the Lotus Wand or Sword, and says, "Thou canst not pass
from concealment unto manifestation save by virtue of the
name YHVH. After the Formless and the Void and the
Darkness, then cometh the knowledge of the Light. I am
the Light which riseth in the Darkness. I am the Exorcist
in the midst of the Exorcism. Appear thou therefore in vis-
ible form before me, for I am the Wielder of the Forces of
the Balance. Thou hast known me now, so pass thou on to
the Cubical Altar of the Universe!"
P -He then recovers Sigil and passes to Altar, laying it thereon
as before shown. He then passes to the East of the Altar,
holding the Sigil and Sword as already explained. Then
doth he rehearse a most potent Conjuration and invocation
of the Spirit unto visible appearance, using and reiterating
all the Divine, Angelic, and Magical Names appropriate to
this end, neither omitting the signs, seals, sigils, lineal fig-
ures, signatures and the like from that conjuration.
Q-The Magician now elevates the covered Sigil towards
heaven, removes the veil entirely, leaving it yet corded, cry-
ing with a loud voice, "Creature of , long hast
thou dwelt in darkness. Quit the Night and seek the Day."
He then replaces it upon the Altar, holds the Magical
Sword erect above it, the pommel immediately above the
center thereof, and says, "By all the Names, Powers, and
Rites already rehearsed, I conjure thee thus into visible
appearance." Then the Mystic Words.
R -Saith the Magician, "As Light hidden in the Darkness can
manifest therefrom, so shalt thdu become manifest from
concealment unto manifestation."
He then takes up the Sigil, stands to East of Altar, and
faces West. He shall then rehearse a long conjuration to the


316 Part IV-Book 4 Fire

powers and spirits immediately superior unto that one
which he seeks to invoke, that they shall force him to man-
ifest himself unto visible appearance.
He then places the Sigil between the Pillars, himself at
the East facing West, then in the Sign of the Enterer doth
he direct the whole current of his will upon the Sigil. Thus
he continueth until such time as he shall perceive his Will
power to be weakening, when he protects himself from the
reflex of the current by the sign of silence, and drops his
hands. He now looks towards the Quarter that the Spirit is
to appear in, and he should now see the first signs of his
visible manifestation. If he be not thus faintly visible, let
the Magician repeat the conjuration of the Superiors of the
Spirit, from the place of the Throne in the East. And this
conjuration may be repeated thrice, each time ending with
a new projection of Will in the sign of the Enterer, etc. But
if at the third time of repetition he appeareth not, then be
it known that there is an error in the working.
So let the Master of Evocations replace the Sigil upon
the Altar, holding the Sword as usual: and thus doing, let
him address a humble prayer unto the Great Gods of
Heaven to grant unto him the force necessary to correctly
complete that evocation. He is then to take back the Sigil to
between the Pillars, and repeat the former processes, when
assuredly that Spirit will begin to manifest, but in a misty
and ill-defined form.
(But if, as is probable, the Operator be naturally
inclined unto evocation, then might that Spirit perchance
manifest earlier in the Ceremony than this. Still, the Cere-
mony is to be performed up to this point, whether he be
there or no.)
Now as soon as the Magician shall see the visible man-
ifestation of that Spirit's presence, he shall quit the station
of the Hierophant, and consecrate afresh with Water and
with Fire, the Sigil of the evoked Spirit.
S -Now doth the Master of Evocations remove from the Sigil
the restricting cord, and holding the freed Sigil in his left


```
Ritual Magic and the Chess Game 317
```
hand, he smites it with the flat blade of his sword, excl'aim-
ing, "By and in the Names of I do invoke upon
thee the power of perfect manifestation unto visible appear-
ance." He then circumambulates the circle thrice holding
the Sigil in his Right hand.
T -The Magician, standing in the place of the Hierophant, but
turning towards the place of the Spirit, and fixing his
attention thereon, now reads a potent Invocation of the
Spirit unto visible appearance, having previously placed
the Sigil on the ground, within the circle, at the quarter
where the Spirit appears.
This Invocation should be some length; and should
rehearse and reiterate the Divine and other Names conso-
nant with the working.
That Spirit should now become fully and clearly visible,
and should be able to speak with a direct voice, if consonant
with his nature. The Magician then proclaims aloud that
the Spirit N. hath been duly and properly evoked in accor-
dance with the sacred Rites.
U-The Magician now addresses an Invocation unto the Lords
of the plane of the Spirit to compel him to perform that
which the Magician shall demand of him.
V -The Magician carefully formulates his demands, questions,
etc., and writes down any of the answers that may be advis-
able. The Master of Evocations now addresses a Conjura-
tion unto the Spirit evoked, binding him to hurt or injure
naught connected with him, or his assistants, or the place.
And that he deceive in nothing, and that he fail not to per-
form that which he hath been commanded.
W-He then dismisses that Spirit by any suitable form, such as
those used in the higher grades of the Outer. And if he will
not go, then shall the Magician compel him by forces con-
trary to his nature. But he must allow a few minutes for
the Spirit to dematerialize the body in which he hath man-
ifested, for he will become less and less material by degrees.
And note well that the Magician (or his companions if he
have any) shall never quit the circle during the process of
evocation, or afterwards, till the Spirit hath quite vanished.


318 Part N-Book of Fire

```
Seeing that in some cases, and with some constitutions, there
may be danger arising from the Astral conditions, and cur-
rents established, and without the actual intention of the
Spirit to harm, although if of a low nature, he would proba-
bly endeavor to do so. Therefore, before the commencement
of the Evocation, let the operator assure himself that every-
thing which may be necessary, be properly arranged within
the circle.
But if it be actually necessary to interrupt the Process, then let
him stop at that point, veil and re-cord the Sigil if it have
been unbound or uncovered, recite a License to Depart or a
Banishing Formula, and perform the Lesser Banishing Rit-
uals both of the Pentagram and Hexagram. Thus only may
he in comparative safety quit the circle.
Note: If the Spirit is placed into a White Triangle outside the
midheaven, he then will speak the truth of necessity.
```
```
Interesting Visitors
One of the methods of invocation is the concept of using a Spirit
to help win the game. This method has been used occasionally
within the Golden Dawn, and I remember one instance during
a game with Pat, my husband, as my opponent. He got very
tired of losing against me, so one day he invoked the Goetic5
Angel, ~urcas,~ to aid him in his game play. Astoundingly, Pat
won in two rounds of the game (seven moves)! I was most put
out, and stipulated that future games must be played with one's
own merits.
Another method is the evocation of a Spirit to act as a part-
ner or opponent in game play. This form of evocation differs con-
siderably from the 22 formula and was popularized by Mathers.
```
5. The Goetia is one of the five books of the Lesser Key of Solomon that was
used by MacGregor Mathers, and which Aleister Crowley published as his
own work, with a few minor additions.
6. The Goetia tells us that this Spirit teaches the arts of philosophy, astrology,
rhetoric, logic, cheiromancy and pyromancy, in all their parts.


```
Ritual Magic and the Chess Game^319
```
The concept here is simply that you make the moves for your
invisible opponent. To do this correctly requires, I feel, a very
real ability to channel (to use a modern-day term for medi-
umship), and the player must be very discerning to make sure
that imagination is not used in obtaining chess instructions.
This is a lot easier if your Spirit has translucently formed to the
visible eye. It is rare to have a Spirit so manifested that it can
move the material objects (chess pieces) itself.
I tried this latter method myself and found my hand liter-
ally moving by itself when I had to move the pieces for the
Spirit. This was a process very similar to automatic writing. A
most enjoyable game!



Ptah-Kether

```
ail Ptah, there was given to Thee a power
upon the Earth in its things which were in a
state of inactivity and Thou didst gather
```
#### H them together after Thou did exist in Thy

```
form of Ta-Tenen, in Thy becoming the "Uniter of
the %o Worlds" which Thy mouth begot and Thy
hands fashioned.
Homage to Thee, 0 Ptah, Thou great God
whose form is hidden in the brilliance of Kether.
Thou openest Thy soul, 0 Father of Fathers of all
the Gods though the Seraphim, Haioth Hakadoth
under the call of Eheie. Thou illuminest Kether
with Thy sight and lightest up the Earth with Thy
brilliant rays in peace.
0 Ptah--treater of Gods, He who passeth
through eternity everlastingness of multitudinous
forms-the Hearer of Prayers. The winds come
forth from Thy breath and the celestial Water from
Thy mouth and the staff of life proceeds from Thy
back. Thou makest the Earth to bring forth fruits,
and gods and men have abundance.
```


Appendix

Enochian Chess Pieces

You can make your own Enochian chess pieces using the cut-out
figures on the following pages and the Ptah piece above.

1. Color the pieces according to the instructions in the chap-
    ter on "Constructing the Chess Pieces," pp. 33-79.
2 For added stability, glue the pages down to shirt card-
    board and let dry.
3. Cut out the pieces into rectangular shapes using the
    heavy lines.
4. Fold on the dotted lines to form bases.
5. Tape or glue coins or other small weights to the bases to
    make the pieces stand upright.
It might be a good idea to photocopy these pages once or
twice and experiment with the copies before you make the final
chess sets.











Bibliography

```
Bell, R.C. Board and Table Games from Many Civilizations. rev.
ed. New York: Dover Publications, 1979.
Chernev, Irving. Combinations: The Heart of Chess. New York:
Dover Publications, 1960.
Cox, Captain Hiram. In Asiatic Researches VII, 1799.
Falkener, Edward. Games Ancient and Oriental, and How to
Play Them. New York: Dover Publications, 1961.
Forbes, Duncan. The History of Chess. 1860
Ganguli, Kisari Mohan, trans. The Mahabharata. 3rd ed. Mun-
shiram Manoharlal Publishers Ltd, 1975.
Golombek, Harry, ed. The Penguin Encyclopedia of Chess. Pen-
guin Books, 1981.
Halevi, Z'ev ben Shimon. Adam and the Kabbalistic Dee. Lon-
don: Rider and Company, 1974.
Harding, T.D. Better Chess for Average Players. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1978.
```
Jones, Sir William. In Asiatic Researches 11, 1788.


(^334) Enochian Chess of the Golden Dawn
Kaplan, Aryeh. Meditation and Kabbalah. York Beach, ME:
Samuel Weiser, 1982.
Levertoff, Paul P., Maurice Simon and Harry Sperling, trans.
The Zohar. New York: Bennet Publications, 1959.
Lkvi, ~li~has. The Key of the Mysteries. trans. Aleister Crowley.
London: Rider & Company, 1959.
Mathers, S.L. MacGregor. The Kabbalah Unveiled. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1926.
Murray, H.J.R. History of Chess. 1913 (Have referred to first
sources as quoted by Murray).
Ofzcial Rules of Chess. 2nd ed. United States Chess Federation
(USCF) Section, and World Chess Federation (FIDE) Section.
Parkhurst, John, M.A. An Hebrew and English Lexicon. 2nd
ed., London.
Ponce, Charles. Kabbalah. San Francisco: Straight Arrow
Books, 1973.
Regardie, Israel. A Practical Guide to Geomantic Divination.
New York: Samuel Weiser, 1972.
Skinner, Stephen. The Oracle of Geomancy. Prism Press, 1977.
Skinner, Stephen. Divination by Geomancy. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul, 1980.
Waite, A.E. The Holy Kabbalah. New Hyde Park, NY: Universi-
ty Books, 1960.
Zukav, Gary. Dance of the Wu Li Masters. Flamingo, 1989.
Printed Golden Dawn Sources
McLean, Adam. Enochian Chess. Privately printed.
Regardie, Israel. The Golden Dawn. St. Paul: Llewellyn Publi-
cations, 1971.


```
Bibliography 335
```
Regardie, Israel. The Complete Golden Dawn System of Magic.
Phoenix: Falcon Press, 1984.

Zalewski, Pat. 25, Secret Teachings of the Golden Dawn: Book I,
The Neophyte Ritual 0=0. St. Paul, Llewellyn Publications,
1991.
Zalewski, Pat and Chris. 25, Secret Teachings of the Golden
Dawn: Book I, The Zelator Ritual 1 =lo. St. Paul, Llewellyn
Publications, 1992.

```
Golden Dawn Manuscripts
Brodie-Innes, J.I. Unnamed Enochian manuscript on board
association.
Document "S."
Document "T."
Mathers, S.L. MacGregor. "Notes on Rosicrucian Chess."
Pullen-Burry, Rose. "Gods of Egypt and the Enochian Tablets."
```
Y1 and Y2 copied by Hugh Campbell from Wynn Westcott's
chess notebook, issued to the ZAM, 1893.
Zalewski, Pat and Chris. "Enochian Chess," 1st vol., unpub-
lished, 1980.

```
Thoth-Hermes Temple Manuscripts
Chess Rules, 1980.
Description of Chess Pieces, 1980.
Divination papers, 1-3, 1981.
Evocation of Chess Pieces, 1980
Invocation of Chess God-forms, 1980
Psychology and the Enochian Pyramid Squares.
Various other miscellaneous papers and documents.
```


